Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3623–3642
July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics
Saber: Efficient Sampling with Adaptive Acceleration and Backtracking
Enhanced Remasking for Diffusion Language Model in Code Generation
Yihong Dong, Zhaoyu Ma, Xue Jiang, Zhiyuan Fan, Jiaru Qian,
Yongmin Li, Jianha Xiao, Zhi Jin, Ge Li
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{dongyh, mazhaoyu}@stu.pku.edu.cn
lige@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Diffusion language models (DLMs) are emerg-
ing as a compelling alternative to the domi-
nant autoregressive paradigm, offering inher-
ent advantages in parallel generation and bidi-
rectional context modeling. However, for the
tasks with strict structural constraints such as
code generation, DLMs face a critical trade-
off between inference speed and output quality,
where accelerating generation by reducing sam-
pling steps often leads to catastrophic perfor-
mance collapse. We find that the fundamen-
tal reasons are: 1) the generation difficulty
is uneven in the structured sequence decod-
ing steps, making DLM’s static acceleration
strategy suboptimal; 2) the context of tokens
generated by DLM evolves continuously, caus-
ing early high-confidence predictions to turn
into irreversible errors. In this paper, we intro-
duce efficient Sampling with Adaptive acceler-
ation and Backtracking Enhanced Remasking
(i.e., Saber), a novel training-free sampling
algorithm for DLMs that first achieves both
better inference speed and output quality in
code generation. Saber dynamically adjusts
the number of tokens unmasked per step based
on the model’s evolving confidence, and uti-
lizes a backtracking mechanism to revert to-
kens whose confidence drops as new context
emerges, with its effectiveness supported by
theoretical analysis. Extensive experiments on
multiple mainstream code generation bench-
marks show that Saber boosts Pass@1 accuracy
by an average of 1.9% over mainstream DLM
sampling methods, while achieving an average
251.4% inference speedup. By leveraging the
inherent advantages of DLMs, our work sig-
nificantly narrows the performance gap with
autoregressive models in code generation.
1
Introduction
Diffusion language models (DLMs) have emerged
as a promising non-autoregressive alternative in the
field of natural language processing (NLP), with
inherent advantages in parallel decoding and bidi-
rectional context modeling through iterative denois-
ing processes (Austin et al., 2021a; Ou et al., 2025;
Nie et al., 2025; Ye et al., 2025b). Unlike exist-
ing autoregressive models (ARMs) that generate
text left-to-right (Radford et al., 2018, 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023), DLMs can simul-
taneously update multiple token positions by pro-
gressively unmasking the generation sequence, en-
abling global planning and iterative refinement (Ye
et al., 2025a; Gong et al., 2025b). This paradigm
is especially compelling for structured generation
tasks like code generation.
Despite the potential advantages, DLMs still lag
behind ARMs in practical performance, especially
for code generation tasks. The fundamental bottle-
neck lies in the crucial speed-quality trade-off. As
shown in Figure 1, in code generation tasks, the
mainstream DLM sampling strategy can lead to a
sharp drop in Pass@1 accuracy (even exceeding
60%), once it increases parallelism to reduce the
sampling steps, making the DLMs nearly unusable.
This severe trade-off prevents DLMs from realiz-
ing their inherent parallel generation advantages in
practice, as the computational savings from fewer
steps are offset by a significant drop in quality.
We argue that the root cause of this severe trade-
off stems from two fundamental challenges inher-
ent to DLM sampling process: 1) This process
exhibits non-uniform difficulty. The complexity
of correctly predicting a token varies significantly
across the task, generation context, and token po-
sition. Therefore, static acceleration strategies per
step (such as using a fixed token number or con-
fidence threshold) are suboptimal. They are often
overly conservative in simple stages, sacrificing
speed, while being overly aggressive in complex
stages, significantly degrading quality. 2) This pro-
cess is particularly susceptible to error propagation.
Unlike ARMs, which only decide what the next
token is, DLMs must decide both where and what
3623

...
Mask Predictor
Prompt
Iterative Denoising
Pass@1
Drop 60.3%
Step
2.43x Speed
Response
Chosen
...
DLM Decoding
Unchosen
Chosen
Figure 1: Left: Illustration of DLM Sampling. Right: The trade-off of DLM Sampling between inference speed and
output quality on a representative benchmark (HumanEval).
token to generate. An incorrect choice made early
in the process, when the contextual information
is sparse, becomes permanently "locked in" and
cannot be revised. This initial error corrupts the
context of all subsequent steps, leading to a cascade
of failures from which the model cannot recover.
In this paper, we propose Saber, namely
efficient Sampling with Adaptive acceleration
and Backtracking Enhanced Remasking, a novel
training-free sampling algorithm designed to ad-
dress the two fundamental challenges. Specifically,
Saber is built on two key strategies: 1) To address
non-uniform difficulty, Saber dynamically adjusts
the number of tokens generated in parallel at each
step, proceeding cautiously in early, context-poor
stages and accelerating as more context is estab-
lished. 2) To counter error accumulation, Saber
introduces a backtracking mechanism. It allows
the model to reverse tokens that are identified as
likely errors based on newly available context, en-
abling a self-correction process that improves final
output quality. By introducing these two strate-
gies, Saber achieves substantial speedups while
enhancing generation quality. We further provide
theoretical analysis that validates the effectiveness
of the proposed method.
To evaluate the effectiveness and generalizabil-
ity of Saber, we conduct extensive experiments on
multiple mainstream code generation benchmarks.
We have the findings from the following aspects:
1) Saber achieves the state-of-the-art performance
for DLM sampling in code generation, boosting
Pass@1 accuracy by an average improvement of
1.9% over mainstream DLM sampling methods
while achieving an average inference speedup of
251.4%. 2) We demonstrate that Saber is a model-
agnostic training-free sampling method, which
shows effectiveness on various DLMs under differ-
ent settings and benchmarks with consistent per-
formance gains. 3) Through a comprehensive ab-
lation study and variants experiments, we validate
that both adaptive acceleration and backtracking-
enhanced remasking are integral to Saber’s suc-
cess. 4) Furthermore, experiments on mathemati-
cal reasoning and scientific reasoning benchmarks
demonstrate that Saber generalizes beyond code
generation tasks. As a result, Saber effectively mit-
igates the speed-quality trade-off with lower total
computational cost, significantly narrowing the per-
formance gap between DLMs and ARMs for code
generation.
2
Motivation
Saber is motivated by two key insights from de-
tailed analyses of the DLM sampling process, as
shown in Figure 2.
Insight 1: Difficulty Decreases over DLM Gener-
ation Process.
The task of generating a masked
token is not uniformly difficult throughout the
DLM generation process. In the initial steps, the
context is sparse, consisting mostly of ‘[MASK]’ to-
kens and the initial prompt. In this low-information
setting, DLMs are highly uncertain, making token
generation challenging. However, as more tokens
are generated in subsequent steps, the contextual
information available to DLMs increases substan-
tially. This richer context progressively reduces
3624

Problem:
def same_chars(s0: str, s1: str):
# Check if two words have the same characters. 
Step 66:
# Sort the characters in both strings
sorted_s0 = sorted(s0)
sorted_s1 = sorted(s1)
# Compare the sorted lists
return sorted_s0[Mask][Mask]_s...
Step 67:
# Sort the characters in both strings
sorted_s0 = sorted(s0)
sorted_s1 = sorted(s1)
# Compare the sorted lists
return sorted_s0 == sorted_s...
Confidence of the token sorted
Step 66
Step 67
Average Confidence
Steps
Confidence Variation Trend with Steps
Figure 2: Motivation Example. Left: Average confidence per step. Right: An example of confidence drop for an
incorrectly generated token as context evolves during decoding.
DLMs’ uncertainty and simplifies the generation
of remaining tokens.
As shown in Figure 2(a), the DLMs’ average pre-
diction confidence steadily increases as more of the
sequence is generated. This observation strongly
motivates the need for an adaptive acceleration
strategy. An ideal DLM sampler should be cautious
when the context is limited and become progres-
sively more aggressive as DLMs’ confidence grows.
This allows for a more principled approach to accel-
eration that maximizes speed without prematurely
committing to low-confidence tokens.
Insight 2: Dynamic Context of DLM Generated
Tokens.
A significant difference between DLMs
and ARMs is the context of generated tokens. In
ARMs, the prefix context for each generated token
is fixed. However, in DLMs, the context of gener-
ated tokens evolves as ‘[MASK]’ tokens are filled
in. Therefore, the DLM’s predicted confidence of
generated tokens can dramatically change as new
information becomes available. For example, a to-
ken might be predicted with high confidence based
on sparse local context, only to be revealed as a
likely error once a more complete global context is
established, as depicted in Figure 2(b).
However, traditional DLM sampling methods
are irreversible, i.e., once a token is unmasked,
the decision is final and cannot be reversed. This
makes them highly susceptible to error propaga-
tion, where an overconfident early error corrupts
the context for all subsequent steps, leading to a
cascade of failures. This issue is a primary driver
of the catastrophic collapse when attempting par-
allel decoding, which highlights the necessity of a
backtracking remasking mechanism. By allowing
DLMs to revise their own predictions, we can miti-
gate the risk of early error propagation and enable
more robust and aggressive parallel generation.
Summary.
These two insights reveal a funda-
mental limitation of current sampling: their static
and irreversible design fails to account for the dy-
namic nature of both generation difficulty and con-
textual certainty during the DLM sampling process.
Therefore, in this paper, we argue that an effec-
tive DLM sampler must address these limitations
by both adapting its generation speed to the evolv-
ing context and being able to revise its own past
decisions to mitigate error propagation.
3
Related Work
In this section, we outline the two most relevant
directions and associated papers of this work.
3.1
Diffusion Language Models for Code
The current landscape of language models is dom-
inated by the autoregressive paradigm (Radford
et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al.,
2023; Dubey et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025). How-
ever, their strict left-to-right and token-by-token
generation process creates a major bottleneck for in-
ference efficiency and inherently limits parallelism
(Li et al., 2025). Therefore, a growing body of
research on DLMs has emerged (Li et al., 2022a;
Austin et al., 2021a; He et al., 2022), which oper-
ate through parallel generation and bidirectional
context modeling to address the aforementioned
constraints. Recently, large-scale DLMs such as
Dream (Ye et al., 2025b), DiffuLLaMA (Gong
et al., 2025a), and LLaDA (Nie et al., 2025) have
demonstrated performance comparable to similar-
scale ARMs, making them a highly promising al-
ternative.
3625

...
Mask Predictor
Prompt
Response
Chosen
Unchosen
...
Saber Decoding
Remask
Input (Step 𝐭)
𝒰𝑡−1
ℳ𝑡−1
0.92
0.41
0.88
0.35
0.79
𝜏! = 0.72
𝜏𝑡=
1
|𝒰"#$|
 ' 𝑐&
'()*+,
&
𝒰!"#
𝐷𝑡
DLM Forward Pass
Adaptive Acceleration via Dynamic Unmasking
Backtracking-Enhanced Remasking
Early
Later
∆!= 𝑐!
"#$- 𝑐!
"
𝒰𝑡= (𝒰𝑡−1 ∪𝐷𝑡)\𝑅𝑡
𝑐"
𝑐"#$
+0.01
-0.21
+0.03
+0.13
-0.02
-0.04
𝑅𝑡
Saber
Figure 3: An Overview of Saber in DLM sampling, which consists of two key components, i.e., Adaptive
Acceleration via Dynamic Unmasking (AADU) and Backtracking-Enhanced Remasking Mechanism (BERM),
during each iterative sampling process.
The inherent capabilities of DLMs in global
planning and iterative optimization make them
naturally suited for code generation (Gong et al.,
2025b; Li et al., 2025). Therefore, the application
of DLMs to this domain has become a major re-
search focus (DeepMind, 2025; Gong et al., 2025b;
Xie et al., 2025; Khanna et al., 2025). However,
these works mainly focus on the training process
of DLMs, while Saber is a training-free DLM sam-
pling method and is orthogonal to them.
3.2
Efficient DLM Sampling Methods
The efficiency of DLMs stems from their ability
to generate multiple tokens in parallel (Luxem-
bourg et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025; Hong et al.,
2025; Huang et al., 2025). Some studies acceler-
ates this process by setting a fixed threshold, such
as Fast-dLLM (Wu et al., 2025), WINO (Hong
et al., 2025), and EB-Sampler (Ben-Hamu et al.,
2025). However, attempting to unmask multiple
tokens in each step degrades the final output quality
(Li et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025).
Moreover, ReMDM (Wang et al., 2025) proposes a
phased sampler that can remask the generated to-
kens during one of the generation phases. However,
the aforementioned methods are less effective on
code generation tasks.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first
to combine adaptive acceleration and backtracking
enhanced remasking to achieve improvement for
both inference speed and output quality in DLM
sampling.
4
Saber
In this section, we first provide the preliminaries for
DLM sampling (§ 4.1), and then describe the two
key components of Saber: Adaptive Acceleration
via Dynamic Unmasking (§ 4.2) and Backtracking-
Enhanced Remasking Mechanism (§ 4.3). Finally,
we provide the overview of Saber (§ 4.4) in DLM
sampling, which is also illustrated in Figure 3.
4.1
Preliminaries
Let a token sequence of length L be denoted by
x = (x1, . . . , xL), where each token xi belongs to
a vocabulary V. In the diffusion process, we use
a special token ‘[MASK]’. At any denoising step
t, the sequence xt consists of a set of unmasked
tokens at indices Ut and a set of masked tokens
at indices Mt. The DLM pθ, parameterized by θ,
takes the partially masked sequence xt as input and
outputs a probability distribution over the vocabu-
lary for each masked position i ∈Mt. We define
the model’s confidence in its top prediction for a
masked token i as ci:
ci := max
v∈V pθ(xi = v | xt),
(1)
where the mainstream DLM sampling method is to
greedily unmask the single token with the highest
confidence at each step. Saber improves upon this
by the following two key components.
3626

4.2
Adaptive Acceleration via Dynamic
Unmasking
The first component of Saber aims to accelerate
inference by unmasking multiple tokens in paral-
lel. Motivated by our observation that the model’s
prediction difficulty is non-uniform, we introduce
a dynamic and adaptive threshold τt to determine
which tokens to unmask. This threshold is calcu-
lated as the average confidence of all previously
unmasked tokens:
τt =
(
1
|Ut−1|
P
j∈Ut−1 cunmask
j
if t > 0,
cmax
otherwise,
(2)
where cunmask
j
is the confidence score of token j at
the step it was unmasked, and we initialize τ0 to
cmax for the initial step.
This dynamic threshold naturally encourages a
cautious-to-aggressive decoding trajectory. In early
steps, when the context is sparse and average confi-
dence is low, τt is low, allowing only the most
certain tokens to be unmasked. As more high-
confidence tokens are generated, τt rises, permit-
ting more aggressive parallel unmasking in later,
more context-rich stages. Using the threshold τt,
we identify a set of candidate tokens to be drafted,
Dt, which includes all masked tokens whose cur-
rent confidence exceeds τt:
Dt = {i ∈Mt−1 | ci ≥τt},
(3)
where the tokens are provisionally unmasked with
their most likely prediction.
4.3
Backtracking-Enhanced Remasking
Mechanism
The second component of Saber introduces a back-
tracking mechanism to correct for potential errors
made during the aggressive generation in the pre-
vious stage. This step is crucial for preventing the
error propagation that causes performance collapse.
Unlike methods that use a fixed threshold,
Saber’s backtracking mechanism first determines
the number of tokens to revise, µt, based on how
aggressively it generated tokens in the current step:
µt = max(1, ⌊|Dt|/µ⌋),
(4)
where |Dt| is the size of the newly unmasked set
and µ is a hyperparameter. This ensures that we
revise at least one token while limiting the revision
to a small fraction of the current step’s output to
maintain speed.
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode of Saber in each step.
1: Input: Sequence xt−1, DLM pθ, unmasked
indices Ut−1, unmasked confidences cunmask
2: Output: Updated sequence xt
// S1: Adaptive Acceleration
3: Compute confidences ci for all i ∈Mt−1 us-
ing pθ(· | xt−1).
4: if t > 0 then
5:
τt ←
1
|Ut−1|
P
j∈Ut−1 cunmask
j
.
6: else
7:
τt ←cmax.
8: end if
9: Dt ←{i ∈Mt−1 | ci > τt}.
10: Create candidate sequence x′
t by unmasking
tokens in Dt.
// S2: Backtracking-Enhanced Remasking
11: µt ←max(1, ⌊|Dt|/µ⌋).
12: Re-evaluate confidences ct
j for all j ∈Ut−1
using the new context pθ(· | x′
t).
13: Initialize an empty set for confidence drops ∆.
14: for each token j ∈Ut−1 do
15:
∆j ←ct−1
j
−ct
j.
▷Calculate drop
16:
Add (j, ∆j) to ∆.
17: end for
18: Rt ←indices of the µt tokens from ∆with
the largest drop.
19: Create final sequence xt by re-masking tokens
at indices Rt in x′
t.
20: Update cunmask by removing confidences for
j ∈Rt and adding confidences for i ∈Dt.
21: Ut ←(Ut−1 ∪Dt) \ Rt.
22: return xt, Ut, cunmask.
Then, we identify which tokens to revise by fo-
cusing on those previously unmasked tokens that
are most inconsistent with the newly available con-
text. For each existing token j ∈Ut−1, we compute
its confidence drop, ∆j, defined as the difference
between the unmasked confidences of (t-1)-th time
ct−1
j
, and its re-evaluated confidence at the current
step ct
j:
∆j = ct−1
j
−ct
j,
(5)
where a large ∆j indicates that the model’s con-
fidence in its earlier prediction has significantly
weakened. We then identify the set of tokens to be
reversed, Rt ⊆Ut−1, by selecting the µt tokens
that exhibit the largest confidence drop. These are
the tokens the model has the most regret about, and
they are reverted to ‘[MASK]’ to be reconsidered in
future steps with a richer context.
3627

4.4
Overall Procedure of Saber
At the conclusion of each step t, the final set of
unmasked tokens is updated by integrating the out-
comes of both the adaptive acceleration and back-
tracking stages:
Ut = (Ut−1 ∪Dt) \ Rt.
(6)
By combining adaptive acceleration with an effi-
cient backtracking mechanism, Saber can decode
aggressively while pruning the most probable er-
rors, thus achieving a superior balance between
inference speed and generation quality. The pseu-
docode of Saber in each DLM sampling step is
summarized in Algorithm 1.
5
Theoretical Analysis
To provide analytical support for the Saber algo-
rithm and explain why it mitigates the failure of
standard DLMs in code generation, we analyze the
DLM decoding process by modeling the evolution
of errors across sampling steps.
Error Accumulation in the Standard DLMs.
Given the strict structural dependencies of program-
ming languages, early generation errors severely
contaminate the bidirectional context, irreversibly
amplifying the model’s prediction uncertainty for
subsequent tokens. Let et be the random variable
representing the number of structural errors rigidly
locked in the unmasked context at step t, and let
err(Dt) = P
k∈Dt I(errk) denote the number of
errors within the newly unmasked candidate set
Dt. In traditional static parallel DLM sampling,
the error evolution is purely monotonic:
E[et | xt−1] = E[et−1 | xt−1]+E[err(Dt) | xt−1].
(7)
Saber addresses this through two mechanisms:
Adaptive Acceleration via Dynamic Unmasking
(AADU) and the Backtracking-Enhanced Remask-
ing Mechanism (BERM).
AADU (Bounding New Errors).
By utilizing a
dynamic threshold τt to conservatively constrain
the unmasking candidate set Dt, AADU establishes
a dynamic fault-tolerance boundary. Assuming the
DLM’s subjective confidence serves as a proxy for
token accuracy with an allowable calibration slack
(formalized in Appendix A.1), we establish the
following bound.
Lemma 5.1 (Step-wise Error Injection Bounding).
Given the context xt−1 and a model overconfidence
slack δcalib ≥0, the conditional expected number
of newly injected errors is bounded by:
E[err(Dt) | xt−1] ≤|Dt|(1 −τt + δcalib).
(8)
While Lemma 5.1 holds for any threshold, our
specific choice of using the historical average of
unmasked tokens for τt serves as an effective em-
pirical way to track the model’s evolving certainty,
safely expanding |Dt| only when the context be-
comes reliable.
BERM (Pruning Contextual Conflicts).
While
AADU bounds the injection of new errors, BERM
is designed to mitigate the strict monotonic accu-
mulation of past errors, as shown in Eq. (7). It
evaluates the step-wise confidence drop (i.e., ∆j)
of previously generated tokens to identify contex-
tual conflicts (see Appendix A.1).
Proposition 5.2 (Degradation Pruning). By select-
ing the µt tokens with the largest confidence drop
to form the rollback set Rt, BERM selects the sub-
set of historical context that minimizes the upper
bound of the total step-wise reliability degradation
within the retained context for a given pruning bud-
get µt.
System Evolution under Saber.
By combining
AADU and BERM, Saber aims to transform the
monotonically increasing error accumulation into
a more controlled process. Parallel unmasking in-
herently introduces a contextual collision penalty
bounded by ϵ (Assumption 3), stemming from ig-
nored conditional dependencies. Because ϵ scales
quadratically with the unmasked set size |Dt|, it
could easily overwhelm a linear pruning budget.
Here, the synergy of Saber is critical: AADU
bounds |Dt| to prevent ϵ from exploding, while
BERM actively offsets the remaining structural er-
rors. Relying on assumptions regarding local reli-
ability preservation (Assumption 2), as derived in
Appendix A.2, by dynamically bounding the new
errors (via AADU) and actively pruning the most
conflicting tokens (via BERM), the evolution of
Saber’s expected error bound can be formulated as:
E[eSaber
t
| xt] ≤E[et−1 | xt−1]
−
X
i∈Rt
P(erri | xt−1)
|
{z
}
BERM Pruning
+
X
k∈Dt
P(errk | xt−1)
|
{z
}
AADU Bounding
+ϵ.
3628

Table 1: Comparison of Saber and existing DLM sampling methods, where the bold indicates the best performance
in this column while the underline indicates the second-best performance, and ET means the Pass@1 performance
on its extended test case version.
Method
HumanEval
MBPP
LiveCodeBench
Pass@1 ↑
ET ↑
Step ↓
Time ↓
Pass@1 ↑
ET ↑
Step ↓
Time ↓
Pass@1 ↑
Step ↓
Time ↓
Standard DLM Sampling
Random
14.63
12.80
256
1:29:40
22.95
18.26
256
2:51:28
0
256
4:09:49
Entropy
41.46
34.15
256
1:30:22
42.15
31.14
256
2:56:42
4.00
256
4:30:31
Confidence
43.29
35.79
256
2:11:52
42.86
31.38
256
3:12:08
9.75
256
5:59:07
Efficient DLM Sampling
Confidence (p=2)
34.76
28.66
128
51:13
40.75
28.57
128
1:35:13
9.25
128
2:57:16
SAR (p=2)
35.98
29.27
128
1:33:00
40.05
27.86
128
1:36:05
9.50
128
2:57:17
Fast-dLLM
39.63
34.15
256
59:40
44.03
30.44
256
2:30:24
8.75
256
2:33:29
Fast-dLLM (+parallel)
39.63
33.54
96.24
25:25
39.34
27.63
73.13
43:18
2.30
96.28
43:22
ReMDM
20.73
18.29
128
1:26:50
31.62
22.48
128
1:28:51
3.30
128
2:50:23
WINO
40.24
31.71
100.12
57:10
43.09
31.38
88.49
1:44:51
9.25
77.43
2:40:30
Saber
45.12
35.98
118.92
41:55
44.73
33.02
110.96
1:33:33
11.00
122.47
2:33:17
Superiority over Traditional Bounds.
In tradi-
tional static parallel DLM sampling, the expected
error accumulates monotonically without any prun-
ing mechanism. In contrast, Saber disrupts this
monotonic accumulation, which can achieve a
lower theoretical error bound, E[eSaber
t
| xt] <
E[eTraditional
t
| xt]. We empirically observe and val-
idate this penalty-offsetting condition in our abla-
tion studies (Section 6). The detailed mathematical
formulation of the traditional bound and the com-
parative proof are provided in Appendix A.3.
Summary.
In strong structural constraints tasks,
such as code generation, the underlying structural
dependencies are highly non-linear. A single early
token error catastrophically cascades, causing the
entire structure to collapse. Therefore, keeping
the sequence entirely error-free (et = 0) through-
out decoding is paramount. By tightly bounding
early error injection and actively pruning degraded
tokens to offset parallel collision penalties, Saber
effectively preserves the code’s structural integrity.
We note that this analytical framework operates at
the per-step level. The end-to-end error dynamics
throughout the generation trajectory are validated
by our subsequent experiments.
6
Experimental Results
In this section, we present a comprehensive em-
pirical evaluation of Saber. We first compare its
performance and efficiency against a wide range of
existing DLM sampling methods on multiple code
generation benchmarks (§6.1). Next, we demon-
strate the model-agnostic nature of Saber by ap-
plying it to various state-of-the-art DLMs (§6.2).
Finally, we conduct a detailed ablation study to
dissect the individual contributions of our proposed
components (§6.3) and provide the discussion of
Saber (§6.4). The detailed description of experi-
ment setups can be found in Appendix J.
6.1
Main Results
Table 1 presents the main results of our compar-
ison on the HumanEval, MBPP, HumanEval-ET
and MBPP-ET, and LiveCodeBench datasets. The
findings clearly demonstrate that Saber sets a new
state-of-the-art for DLM sampling in code gener-
ation, achieving the highest Pass@1 scores across
all benchmarks while simultaneously delivering
substantial improvements in inference speed.
Saber Effectively Mitigates the Speed-Quality
Trade-off.
Compared to standard DLM sam-
pling strategies (Random, Entropy, Confidence),
Saber delivers vastly superior performance. For in-
stance, on HumanEval, Saber improves the Pass@1
score from 43.3% (Confidence) to 45.1% while
reducing the inference time by nearly 70% (from
over 2 hours to just 41 minutes). This result directly
refutes the notion that acceleration must come at
the cost of quality. While naively increasing par-
allelism by generating more tokens per step (e.g.,
Confidence p=2) leads to a significant performance
drop (from 43.3% to 34.8%), Saber’s intelligent
sampling process successfully avoids this collapse.
Saber Outperforms State-of-the-Art Efficient
Samplers. When compared to recent efficient sam-
pling methods, Saber establishes a new Pareto fron-
tier for the speed-quality trade-off. WINO, a strong
baseline, achieves impressive speed by minimiz-
ing decoding steps. However, Saber is even faster
3629

in terms of time on most benchmarks, indicating
a more efficient computation per step. For exam-
ple, on HumanEval, Saber is over 25% faster than
WINO while also achieving a ∼5% higher Pass@1
score. This superior performance is attributed to
our backtracking mechanism, which provides a
safety net for the adaptive acceleration, allowing
for aggressive parallelization without sacrificing
accuracy. Similarly, while Fast-dLLM shows com-
petitive results on MBPP, Saber matches its quality
while being nearly 40% faster. On LiveCodeBench,
a benchmark designed to be robust against con-
tamination, Saber also achieves the state-of-the-art
performance, demonstrating its strong generaliza-
tion capabilities.
Overall, these results confirm that Saber success-
fully breaks the existing speed-quality compromise
in DLM sampling for code generation.
6.2
Generalizability Across Different DLMs
To validate the model-agnostic claim of Saber,
we apply it to three distinct open-source DLMs,
i.e.,
LLaDA-8B-Instruct (Nie et al., 2025),
Dream-v0-Instruct-7B (Ye et al., 2025b), and
DiffuCoder-7B-cpGRPO (Gong et al., 2025b). We
compare the performance of Saber against the stan-
dard confidence-based sampler for each DLM on
the HumanEval benchmark.
Table 2: Effectiveness of Saber compared to mainstream
DLM sampling method based on different DLMs.
Pass@1 ↑
Steps ↓
Time ↓
LLaDA-8B-Instruct
Confidence (p=1)
0.4329
256
2:11:52
Saber
0.4512
118.92
41:55
Dream-v0-Instruct-7B
Confidence (p=1)
0.2805
256
1:16:15
Saber
0.2927
156.68
46:39
DiffuCoder-7B-cpGRPO
Confidence (p=1)
0.5671
256
1:12:47
Saber
0.5732
140.34
37:08
As shown in Table 2, Saber consistently im-
proves both accuracy and efficiency across all
tested models, demonstrating that its benefits are
not tied to a specific architecture or training process.
For each model, Saber delivers a higher Pass@1
score while simultaneously reducing the number of
decoding steps and the total inference time. For in-
stance, on Dream-v0-Instruct-7B, Saber boosts
Pass@1 and cuts inference time by nearly 40%. On
DiffuCoder-7B, a model specifically optimized
for code, Saber further enhances its performance
while reducing the inference time by nearly half.
To evaluate the generalizability of Saber from
more dimensions, we conduct experiments on dif-
ferent settings, domains, and benchmarks in Ap-
pendix D, Appendix E, and Appendix H, respec-
tively. Notably, beyond code generation, Saber also
demonstrates consistent improvements on mathe-
matical reasoning and scientific reasoning tasks
(See Appendix E). This robust performance across
different model families, settings, domains, and
benchmarks validates that Saber addresses funda-
mental challenges in DLM sampling, making it a
general, plug-and-play enhancement.
6.3
Ablation Study
To understand the individual contributions of the
two core components of Saber, i.e., Adaptive Accel-
eration via Dynamic Unmasking and Backtracking-
Enhanced Remasking Mechanism, we conduct a
thorough ablation study on the HumanEval dataset.
The results are presented in Table 3.
Adaptive Acceleration is the Primary Driver
of Efficiency. When we remove the Adaptive Ac-
celeration via Dynamic Unmasking, the sampler re-
lies solely on the backtracking mechanism. While
the Pass@1 score remains high at 44.5%, the num-
ber of decoding steps reverts to the baseline 256,
and the inference time increases dramatically to
over 90 minutes. This clearly demonstrates that
the adaptive acceleration component is the main
source of Saber’s speedup.
Table 3: Ablation study of different components in our
proposed method.
Method
Pass@1 ↑
Steps ↓
Time ↓
Ours
0.4512
118.92
41:55
w/o Adaptive Accelerate
0.4451
256
1:32:33
w/o Backtracking Remask
0.3523
65.67
28:30
w/o both
0.3476
128
51:13
∆confidence from init.
0.4207
121.46
42:32
Backtracking is Essential for High Qual-
ity. Conversely, when we remove Backtracking-
Enhanced Remasking Mechanism, the sampler be-
comes a purely aggressive adaptive accelerator.
This variant is extremely fast, finishing in under 30
minutes with only 65.67 steps on average. How-
ever, this speed comes at a steep price: the Pass@1
score drops significantly from 45.1% to 35.23%.
This result highlights that aggressive parallelization
without a corrective mechanism is prone to error
3630

propagation, confirming that the backtracking stage
is crucial for maintaining high generation quality.
Synergy of Components. Saber achieves the
best of both worlds, i.e., a high Pass@1 score of
45.1% and a fast inference time of ∼41 minutes,
which also shows that the two components are syn-
ergistic. The adaptive acceleration allows for ag-
gressive sampling, while the backtracking mech-
anism provides the necessary safety net to prune
errors, enabling a combination of speed and accu-
racy that neither component can achieve alone. We
also validate our dynamic thresholding strategy by
replacing it with the average threshold of init gen-
eration of tokens (∆confidence from init.). This
results in a lower Pass@1 score of 42.1%, confirm-
ing the benefits of an adaptive approach that adjusts
to the evolving context.
6.4
Qualitative Analysis
Error Type Analysis.
We conduct an error type
analysis and categorize the generation failures
into three distinct types: Syntax Errors, Compi-
lation/Runtime Errors, and Semantic Errors. As
shown in Table 4, Saber consistently outperforms
the standard baseline across all error categories.
Notably, Saber significantly reduces Syntax Er-
rors by 66.7% and Compilation/Runtime Errors
by 21.5%. This quantitative evidence robustly sup-
ports our theoretical assertion that the backtracking-
enhanced remasking mechanism effectively miti-
gates structural and syntactical error propagation
during parallel decoding.
Table 4: Error type analysis.
Error Type
Baseline
Saber
↓∆
Syntax Error
3
1
66.7%
Compilation/Runtime Error
14
11
21.5%
Semantic Error
92
73
20.7%
Case Study.
Figure 4 presents a side-by-side
comparison of code generated by the default
LLaDA sampler and Saber on two problems from
the HumanEval benchmark. These examples high-
light how Saber’s ability to self-correct prevents
the kind of logical failures that plague standard
irreversible samplers.
In Problem 1, the default sampler produces code,
which is syntactically plausible but logically non-
sensical. In contrast, Saber generates the correct,
standard nested loop structure. This suggests that
the iterative refinement process, guided by back-
tracking, helps enforce logical and structural co-
herence, which is paramount in code generation.
In Problem 2, the default sampler fundamentally
misunderstands the problem’s constraints. Saber,
however, correctly decomposes the problem into
its core logical components: checking the array’s
length and verifying the occurrence count of the
maximum element. This ability to correctly con-
struct multi-step, constraint-based logic is a direct
benefit of the backtracking mechanism. We hypoth-
esize that the model may initially draft a simpler,
incorrect solution, which is then revised in subse-
quent steps as the evolving context makes the error
more apparent, leading to the robust final code.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we addressed the critical speed-
quality trade-off for DLM sampling in code gen-
eration and introduced Saber, a novel, training-
free sampling algorithm for DLMs that combines
both adaptive acceleration via dynamic unmask-
ing and backtracking-enhanced remasking mech-
anism. Our extensive experiments indicate that
Saber substantially outperforms existing DLM sam-
pling methods with great generalizability, signif-
icantly narrowing the performance gap with au-
toregressive models in code generation. Moreover,
results on mathematical reasoning and scientific
reasoning benchmarks suggest that Saber general-
izes beyond code generation. We leave a broader
exploration across diverse domains and tasks as
future work.
8
Limitation
Our work has the following two main limitations.
First, Saber requires slightly more computational
resources than direct sampling in a DLM sam-
pling step. Specifically, Saber requires O(N) CPU-
based operations (where N is the sequence length)
to execute the dynamic unmasking and backtrack-
ing remasking logic. However, compared to the
massive GPU-intensive matrix multiplications re-
quired by DLM forward passes, it is marginal and
acceptable. Furthermore, since Saber significantly
reduces the total number of denoising iterations,
the overall computational cost is actually lower
than that of standard sampling. Detailed discussion
can be found in Appendix C.
Second, we only explore the choice of hyper-
parameters within reasonable ranges, considering
the trade-off between performance and speed, as
3631

shown in Table 8 and the right of Figure 1. Fur-
ther optimization of hyperparameters could yield
additional improvements.
9
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the National Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China under Grant No.
62192733, 62192730, 62192731, the National Key
R&D Program under Grant No. 2023YFB4503801,
and the Beijing Major Science and Technology
Project under Contract No. Z251100008425005.
References
Jacob Austin, Daniel D. Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel
Tarlow, and Rianne van den Berg. 2021a. Structured
denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 34, NeurIPS 2021, pages 17981–17993.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten
Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen
Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and 1 oth-
ers. 2021b. Program synthesis with large language
models. ArXiv, abs/2108.07732.
Heli Ben-Hamu, Itai Gat, Daniel Severo, Niklas Nolte,
and Brian Karrer. 2025. Accelerated sampling from
masked diffusion models via entropy bounded un-
masking. ArXiv, abs/2505.24857.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, T. J. Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeff Wu, Clemens
Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Language models are
few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 33, NeurIPS 2020.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan,
Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Har-
rison Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg
Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela
Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, and 39 others.
2021a. Evaluating large language models trained on
code. ArXiv, abs/2107.03374.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming
Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Ka-
plan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, and 1 others. 2021b.
Evaluat-
ing large language models trained on code. ArXiv,
abs/2107.03374.
DeepMind. 2025. Gemini diffusion.
Yihong Dong, Jiazheng Ding, Xue Jiang, Ge Li, Zhuo
Li, and Zhi Jin. 2025a. Codescore: Evaluating code
generation by learning code execution. ACM Trans.
Softw. Eng. Methodol., 34(3):77:1–77:22.
Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2024. Self-
collaboration code generation via ChatGPT. ACM
Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 33(7):189:1–189:38.
Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Jiaru Qian, Tian Wang,
Kechi Zhang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2025b. A survey
on code generation with llm-based agents. CoRR,
abs/2508.00083.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony S. Hartshorn, Aobo
Yang, and et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models.
ArXiv, abs/2407.21783.
Shansan Gong, Shivam Agarwal, Yizhe Zhang, Jiacheng
Ye, Lin Zheng, Mukai Li, Chenxin An, Peilin Zhao,
Wei Bi, Jiawei Han, Hao Peng, and Lingpeng Kong.
2025a. Scaling diffusion language models via adap-
tation from autoregressive models. In The Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR 2025.
Shansan Gong, Ruixiang Zhang, Huangjie Zheng, Ji-
atao Gu, Navdeep Jaitly, Lingpeng Kong, and Yizhe
Zhang. 2025b. Diffucoder: Understanding and im-
proving masked diffusion models for code generation.
ArXiv, abs/2506.20639.
Sumit Gulwani, Oleksandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, and
1 others. 2017. Program synthesis. Foundations and
Trends® in Programming Languages, 4(1-2):1–119.
Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Nan Duan, Yanlin Wang, Ming
Zhou, and Jian Yin. 2022. Unixcoder: Unified cross-
modal pre-training for code representation. In ACL
(1), pages 7212–7225. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao
Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shi-
rong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025.
Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
llms via reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.12948.
Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai
Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi,
Y. Wu, Y. K. Li, Fuli Luo, Yingfei Xiong, and Wen-
feng Liang. 2024. Deepseek-coder: When the large
language model meets programming - the rise of code
intelligence. CoRR, abs/2401.14196.
Zhengfu He, Tianxiang Sun, Kuan Wang, Xuanjing
Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. 2022. Diffusionbert: Im-
proving generative masked language models with dif-
fusion models. In Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2023.
Feng Hong, Geng Yu, Yushi Ye, Haicheng Huang,
Huangjie Zheng, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and
3632

Jiangchao Yao. 2025. Wide-in, narrow-out: Revok-
able decoding for efficient and effective dllms. ArXiv,
abs/2507.18578.
Pengcheng Huang, Shuhao Liu, Zhenghao Liu, Yukun
Yan, Shuo Wang, Zulong Chen, and Tong Xiao. 2025.
Pc-sampler: Position-aware calibration of decoding
bias in masked diffusion models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.13021.
Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia
Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-
Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Live-
codebench: Holistic and contamination free evalua-
tion of large language models for code. In The Thir-
teenth International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, ICLR 2025.
Xue Jiang, Yihong Dong, Yongding Tao, Huanyu Liu,
Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2025. ROCODE: integrating
backtracking mechanism and program analysis in
large language models for code generation. In ICSE,
pages 334–346. IEEE.
Xue Jiang, Yihong Dong, Lecheng Wang, Qiwei Shang,
and Ge Li. 2024.
Self-planning code generation
with large language models. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol., 33(7):182:1–182:30.
Samar Khanna, Siddhant Kharbanda, Shufan Li, Harshit
Varma, Eric Wang, Sawyer Birnbaum, Ziyang Luo,
Yanis Miraoui, Akash Palrecha, Stefano Ermon,
Aditya Grover, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. 2025. Mer-
cury: Ultra-fast language models based on diffusion.
ArXiv, abs/2506.17298.
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas
Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc
Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim,
Qian Liu, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Terry Yue Zhuo,
Thomas Wang, Olivier Dehaene, Mishig Davaadorj,
Joel Lamy-Poirier, João Monteiro, Oleh Shliazhko,
and 48 others. 2023. Starcoder: may the source be
with you! Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023.
Tianyi Li, Mingda Chen, Bowei Guo, and Zhiqiang
Shen. 2025. A survey on diffusion language models.
ArXiv, abs/2508.10875.
Xiang Lisa Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy
Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2022a. Diffusion-
lm improves controllable text generation.
In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35, NeurIPS 2022.
Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman,
Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles,
James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, and
1 others. 2022b. Competition-level code generation
with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097.
Wang Ling, Phil Blunsom, Edward Grefenstette,
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomás Kociský, Fumin Wang,
and Andrew W. Senior. 2016. Latent predictor net-
works for code generation. In ACL (1). The Associa-
tion for Computer Linguistics.
Omer Luxembourg, Haim H. Permuter, and Eliya
Nachmani. 2025. Plan for speed - dilated schedul-
ing for masked diffusion language models. ArXiv,
abs/2506.19037.
Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Xiaolu Zhang,
Jingyang Ou, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong
Wen, and Chongxuan Li. 2025. Large language dif-
fusion models. ArXiv, abs/2502.09992.
Jingyang Ou, Shen Nie, Kaiwen Xue, Fengqi Zhu, Ji-
acheng Sun, Zhenguo Li, and Chongxuan Li. 2025.
Your absorbing discrete diffusion secretly models the
conditional distributions of clean data. In The Thir-
teenth International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, ICLR 2025.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya
Sutskever, and 1 others. 2018. Improving language
understanding by generative pre-training. San Fran-
cisco, CA, USA.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners.
Veselin Raychev, Martin T. Vechev, and Eran Yahav.
2014.
Code completion with statistical language
models. In PLDI, pages 419–428. ACM.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten
Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi,
Jingyu Liu, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, Artyom
Kozhevnikov, Ivan Evtimov, Joanna Bitton, Man-
ish Bhatt, Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori,
Wenhan Xiong, Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, and
6 others. 2023. Code llama: Open foundation models
for code. ArXiv, abs/2308.12950.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, Aur’elien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models. ArXiv,
abs/2302.13971.
Guanghan Wang, Yair Schiff, Subham Sekhar Sahoo,
and Volodymyr Kuleshov. 2025. Remasking discrete
diffusion models with inference-time scaling. ArXiv,
abs/2503.00307.
Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq R. Joty, and teven
C. H. Hoi. 2021. Codet5: Identifier-aware unified
pre-trained encoder-decoder models for code under-
standing and generation. In EMNLP (1), pages 8696–
8708.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel,
Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H.
Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy
Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022. Emer-
gent abilities of large language models.
ArXiv,
abs/2206.07682.
3633

Chengyue Wu, Hao Zhang, Shuchen Xue, Zhijian Liu,
Shizhe Diao, Ligeng Zhu, Ping Luo, Song Han, and
Enze Xie. 2025. Fast-dllm: Training-free accelera-
tion of diffusion llm by enabling kv cache and parallel
decoding. ArXiv, abs/2505.22618.
Zhihui Xie, Jiacheng Ye, Lin Zheng, Jiahui Gao, Jing-
wei Dong, Zirui Wu, Xueliang Zhao, Shansan Gong,
Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. 2025.
Dream-coder 7b: An open diffusion language model
for code.
Jiacheng Ye, Jiahui Gao, Shansan Gong, Lin Zheng,
Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. 2025a.
Beyond autoregression: Discrete diffusion for com-
plex reasoning and planning. In The Thirteenth In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2025.
Jiacheng Ye, Zhihui Xie, Lin Zheng, Jiahui Gao, Zirui
Wu, Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong.
2025b. Dream 7b: Diffusion large language models.
ArXiv, abs/2508.15487.
Runpeng Yu, Xinyin Ma, and Xinchao Wang. 2025.
Dimple: Discrete diffusion multimodal large lan-
guage model with parallel decoding.
ArXiv,
abs/2505.16990.
Lingzhe Zhang, Liancheng Fang, Chiming Duan,
Minghua He, Leyi Pan, Pei Xiao, Shiyu Huang, Yun-
peng Zhai, Xuming Hu, Philip S. Yu, and Aiwei Liu.
2025. A survey on parallel text generation: From par-
allel decoding to diffusion language models. ArXiv,
abs/2508.08712.
3634

A
Extended Analytical Formulation and Proofs
A.1
Formal Assumptions and Definitions
Throughout our analysis, P(erri | x) denotes the true objective error probability at position i under the
reference ground truth distribution.
Assumption 1 (Tight Confidence Calibration with Slack). We assume the DLM’s predicted confidence
score provides a tight two-sided bound on the true error probability evaluated under any arbitrary
conditioning context x, subject to a calibration slack δcalib ≥0. Specifically, the conditional probability
of a prediction error at position i satisfies:
| P(erri | x) −(1 −cx
i )| ≤δcalib,
(9)
where cx
i is the predicted confidence given context x, i.e., pθ(xi = y∗
i | x). (for simplicity in our
formulations, we use ct
i to denote the confidence given context xt, and ct−1
i
given xt−1).
While modern neural networks consistently exhibit context- and position-dependent calibration issues,
explicitly bounding the deviation globally via δcalib serves as a simplifying mathematical assumption.
In practice, assuming equality holds in expectation, variations in δcalib are implicitly absorbed by our
conservative dynamic thresholding strategy.
Definition 1 (Step-wise Reliability Degradation). For a historical token j ∈Ut−1, the degradation in
reliability between the previous step t −1 and the current step t is quantified by its step-wise confidence
drop, defined as:
∆j = ct−1
j
−ct
j.
(10)
A larger ∆j indicates that the model’s certainty regarding the previously generated token j has been
significantly weakened by the newly established context xt.
Assumption 2 (Local Reliability Preservation via Conflict Resolution). A high confidence drop (∆j)
indicates that a previously generated token j is highly incompatible with the newly decoded context Dt. We
assume that by removing the µt most conflicting tokens (Rt), BERM acts as a localized coordinate descent
step. Driven by the Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) objective of the masked diffusion model, we assume this
targeted pruning resolves the largest contextual contradictions, ensuring the expected reliability of the
remaining retained context (Ut−1 \ Rt) does not severely deteriorate:
X
j∈Ut−1\Rt
P(errj | xt) ≤
X
j∈Ut−1\Rt
P(errj | xt−1).
(11)
While masking tokens can theoretically disrupt long-range syntactic dependencies in non-autoregressive
generation, we treat this targeted pruning as a first-order approximation that primarily resolves severe
local structural conflicts without catastrophically destabilizing the broader context.
Assumption 3 (Bounded Contextual Collision in Parallel Unmasking). Unlike purely autoregressive
decoding, unmasking multiple tokens (Dt) simultaneously introduces joint dependencies. We encapsulate
this structural collision penalty as ϵ, which is upper-bounded by a quadratic function of the unmasked set
size:
ϵ ≤C · |Dt|2,
(12)
where C > 0 is a constant representing the maximum pairwise mutual information penalty.
In
fully autoregressive decoding, the joint probability incorporates full dependencies: p(xA, xB) =
p(xA)p(xB | xA). Parallel unmasking simplifies this by assuming local conditional independence:
p(xA, xB) ≈p(xA)p(xB). Since a set of size |Dt| contains
 |Dt|
2

interacting pairs, the structural colli-
sion approximation error naturally scales quadratically. This highlights the necessity of AADU: without
dynamically bounding |Dt|, the quadratic growth of ϵ would inevitably exceed the BERM’s linear pruning
capacity.
3635

A.2
Detailed System Evolution Derivation
In sequence generation, the error probability of any token is strongly conditioned on the current context.
When transitioning from step t −1 to t, the context evolves from xt−1 to xt based on the updated
unmasked set Ut = (Ut−1 \ Rt) ∪Dt. Let eSaber
t
= P
m∈Ut I(errm) denote the total number of errors in
the unmasked set at step t.
By taking the conditional expectation with respect to the updated context xt, applying the contextual
preservation (Assumption 2), and incorporating the parallel collision penalty (Assumption 3), the upper
bound of the system error at the end of step t is derived as:
E[eSaber
t
| xt] =
X
j∈Ut−1\Rt
P(errj | xt) +
X
k∈Dt
P(errk | xt)
≤
X
j∈Ut−1\Rt
P(errj | xt−1) +
X
k∈Dt
P(errk | xt−1) + ϵ
= E[et−1 | xt−1] −
X
i∈Rt
P(erri | xt−1) +
X
k∈Dt
P(errk | xt−1) + ϵ.
(13)
Notice that the transition to the final equality holds by the linearity of expectation, where the total expected
error at t −1 encapsulates the sum of probabilities. The third term P
k∈Dt P(errk | xt−1) is bounded by
|Dt|(1 −τt + δcalib) per Lemma 5.1, while the pruning term is designed to offset the ϵ collision penalty.
A.3
Comparison with Traditional Bounds
In traditional static parallel DLM sampling, the expected error accumulates monotonically without any
pruning mechanism. Given a candidate set Dt, the error bound at step t is:
E[eTraditional
t
| xt] ≤E[et−1 | xt−1] + |Dt|(1 −τstatic + δcalib) + ϵ,
(14)
where ϵ is the corresponding collision penalty, and τstatic denotes the fixed confidence threshold used by
standard parallel decoding baselines.
In contrast, Saber disrupts this monotonicity. By dynamically bounding the new errors (via AADU)
and actively pruning the most conflicting tokens (via BERM), Saber’s expected error satisfies:
E[eSaber
t
| xt] ≤E[et−1 | xt−1] −
X
i∈Rt
P(erri | xt−1) +
X
k∈Dt
P(errk | xt−1) + ϵ.
(15)
Because the pruning term explicitly offsets the collision penalty ϵ, and the dynamic thresholding restricts
the injection of new errors, under the condition that P
i∈Rt P(erri | xt−1) > |Dt|(τstatic −τt), Saber can
achieve a lower error bound E[eSaber
t
| xt] < E[eTraditional
t
| xt].
A.4
Proofs
Proof of Lemma 5.1
Proof. Given the context xt−1, the candidate set Dt and the threshold τt are deterministic. By the design
of AADU, for every token index i ∈Dt, ct
i ≥τt holds.
Based on Assumption 1 (specifically the upper bound property), the conditional probability of an error
at position i is bounded:
P(erri | xt−1) ≤1 −ct
i + δcalib.
By the linearity of expectation, the conditional expected number of errors drafted within Dt is:
E[err(Dt) | xt−1] =
X
i∈Dt
P(erri | xt−1).
Since ct
i ≥τt =⇒1 −ct
i ≤1 −τt for all i ∈Dt, we can bound the expectation:
E[err(Dt) | xt−1] ≤
X
i∈Dt
(1 −ct
i + δcalib) ≤
X
i∈Dt
(1 −τt + δcalib) = |Dt|(1 −τt + δcalib).
This establishes the conditional adaptive step-wise error injection bound, concluding the proof.
3636

Proof of Proposition 5.2
Proof. By Assumption 1 (tight two-sided calibration), the conditional probability bounds for any historical
token j ∈Ut−1 satisfy P(errj | xt) ≤1 −ct
j + δcalib and P(errj | xt−1) ≥1 −ct−1
j
−δcalib. Thus, the
relative conditional error growth for token j is bounded by:
P(errj | xt) −P(errj | xt−1) ≤(1 −ct
j) −(1 −ct−1
j
) + 2δcalib = ∆j + 2δcalib.
Therefore, ∆j acts as a valid proxy for the upper bound of the step-wise error degradation. The total
upper bound of reliability degradation of the retained context Uretain
t−1
= Ut−1 \ Rt is proportional to:
X
j∈Ut−1
∆j −
X
i∈Rt
∆i.
BERM partitions the historical context into the rollback set Rt (size µt) and the retained set Uretain
t−1 .
By algorithm design, BERM selects Rt such that the elements with the largest confidence drop (∆i) are
chosen. This guarantees that for any alternative pruning set R′ ⊆Ut−1 of size µt:
X
i∈Rt
∆i ≥
X
k∈R′
∆k.
Because BERM explicitly maximizes the subtracted term P
i∈Rt ∆i via its greedy selection strategy,
it minimizes the proxy upper bound of the remaining total error degradation within the retained context
sequence given the pruning budget µt. This completes the argument under the stated assumptions.
B
Case Study
Figure 4 presents a comparison of code generated by the base model LLaDA and Saber on two HumanEval
problems. In Task I, LLaDA fails to enumerate all subarrays correctly. It uses a single loop with an
incorrect range derived from the distinct element count, producing both logically flawed and syntactically
invalid code. Saber instead generates the correct nested loop structure that systematically checks every
subarray. In Task II, LLaDA misinterprets the “Good array” definition. Its length check relies on an
incorrect relationship, and its boundary check after sorting is logically impossible for a valid sorted array.
Saber correctly decomposes the problem into verifying the length condition (n=m+1n = m+1 n=m+1)
and the occurrence constraint (count(m)=2count(m) = 2 count(m)=2). These examples illustrate how
Saber’s backtracking mechanism helps avoid the kind of early structural errors that the irreversible base
sampler cannot recover from.
C
Computational Overhead Analysis
In this section, we provide a detailed complexity breakdown and a comparative analysis of Saber’s
operations. Saber introduces two primary sources of per-step overhead, both of which are strictly bounded
by the sequence length N:
• Adaptive Acceleration via Dynamic Unmasking: The process involves calculating a dynamic
threshold (by averaging the confidence probabilities of previously unmasked tokens) and scanning
masked positions to select candidates. These operations require only a single sequential pass,
resulting in a time complexity of O(N).
• Backtracking-Enhanced Remasking Mechanism: Identifying the lowest-confidence tokens to
re-mask involves calculating confidence differences and finding the bottom-µt elements within the
candidate set. This selection process can be executed efficiently in O(N) time using linear-time
selection algorithms.
3637

from typing import List
class Solution:
def isGood(self, nums: List[int]) -> bool:
# Find the maximum number in the array
max_num = max(nums)
# Check if the length of the array is equal to
# the sum of the counts of the maximum number plus 1
if len(nums) != nums.count(max_num) + 1:
return False
# Sort the array
nums.sort()
# Check if the first and last elements of array are max_num
if nums[0] != max_num or nums[-1] != max_num:
return False
return True
from typing import List
class Solution:
def countCompleteSubarrays(self, nums: List[int]) -> int:
# Calculate the number of distinct
# elements in the whole array
distinct_count = len(set(nums))
# Initialize the count of complete subarrays
count = 0
# Iterate over all possible subarrays
for i in range(len(nums)):
# Get the subarray starting from index i
subarray = set(nums[j] for j in range(i, len(set(nums)))
# Check if the number of distinct elements
# in the subarray is equal to the number of
# distinct elements in the whole array
if len(subarray) == distinct_count:
count += 1
return count
from typing import List
class Solution:
def countCompleteSubarrays(self, nums: List[int]) -> int:
# Calculate the number of distinct elements
# in the whole array
distinct_count = len(set(nums))
# Initialize the count of complete subarrays
count = 0
# Iterate over all possible subarrays
for i in range(len(nums)):
for j in range(i + 1, len(nums) + 1):
# Check if the subarray is complete
subarray = nums[i:j]
if len(set(subarray)) != distinct_count:
continue
# If the subarray is complete, increment the
# count of complete subarrays
count += 1
return count
Saber (Ours)
LLaDA (Base Model)
Task I: Given an array of positive integers, you are asked to find the total number of complete subarrays. A subarray is defined as complete if the number of distinct 
elements it contains is equal to the total number of distinct elements present in the entire original array.
Task II : Given an array of positive integers, we need to determine if it is a "Good" array. An array is considered "Good" if it is a permutation of a base array, where the 
base array base[m] is defined as the sequence [1,2,3,…,m−1,m,m]. In simpler terms, if m is the largest element in the array, the array is Good if and only if its length is 
m+1, the number m appears exactly twice, and every other number from 1 to m−1 appears exactly once.
from typing import List
class Solution:
def isGood(self, nums: List[int]) -> bool:
# Find the maximum number in the array
max_num = max(nums)
# Calculate the number of elements in the array
n = len(nums)
# Check if the number of elements in the array
# matches the length of base[n]
if n != max_num + 1:
return False
# Check if the count of the maximum number in
# the array matches the number of occurrences
# of the maximum number in base[n]
if nums.count(max_num) != 2:
return False
return True
Case Study
Saber (Ours)
LLaDA (Base Model)
❌
❌
❌
Incorrect nested loop range and 
missing inner boundary traversal
Flawed length validation logic
Incorrect boundary value checks
Figure 4: Case study.
Crucially, these linear O(N) algorithmic operations are remarkably lightweight and are executed
as CPU-based logic. In stark contrast, a single forward pass of a Discrete Diffusion Language Model
(DLM) requires massive, heavily parameterized matrix multiplications on the GPU—such as self-attention
mechanisms and feed-forward networks—which represent billions of operations and dominate the actual
inference latency.
Empirically, our runtime breakdown confirms this theoretical analysis. The algorithmic overhead of
Saber does not noticeably inflate the per-step execution time. Instead, because Saber’s adaptive and
self-correcting mechanisms effectively reduce the total number of required denoising iterations, the
marginal per-step CPU overhead is overwhelmingly offset by the reduction in expensive GPU forward
passes. Therefore, the overall computational cost is lower than that of standard sampling. As demonstrated
in our main results (Table 1), Saber achieves an average overall inference speedup of 251.4% under the
condition of boosting Pass@1 accuracy by an average of 1.9%.
As a result, the computational cost introduced by Saber in each step is entirely marginal, but
its total computational cost is instead lower, so it’s highly acceptable for real-world code generation
deployments.
D
Evaluation with Different Configurations on other base DLMs
In our main experiments, standard decoding settings (e.g., temperature = 0) were adopted to maintain
consistency with previous DLM sampling literature. To comprehensively evaluate performance under dif-
3638

ferent configurations, we reproduced the experiments following the best settings of Dream and DiffuCoder,
where we directly followed the settings reported in their original paper for Dream and we conducted a
grid search to determine the optimal settings for DiffuCoder (since its original paper did not report). As
shown in Table 5, Saber demonstrates stable and consistent improvements under these specific settings,
validating the effectiveness of our approach across different configurations.
Table 5: Effectiveness of Saber compared to the baseline under the optimal settings of Dream and DiffuCoder on
the HumanEval benchmark.
Base Model
Method
HumanEval ↑
HumanEval-ET ↑
Step ↓
Time ↓
Dream
Baseline
0.5749
0.4756
256
1:18:12
Ours
0.6037
0.5183
141.04
40:49
DiffuCoder
Baseline
0.6829
0.5937
256
1:19:56
Ours
0.6890
0.6098
168.02
53:19
E
Generalizability Across Different Domains
To further evaluate the generalizability of Saber beyond code generation tasks, we extended our experi-
ments to mathematical reasoning and general question-answering domains. Specifically, we evaluated our
method against the default DLM sampling strategy on the MATH-500 and ARC-Challenge benchmarks.
As shown in Table 6, Saber consistently demonstrates superior performance and efficiency across both
datasets. On MATH-500, Saber improves the Pass@1 score from 32.4% to 34.0% while reducing the
total inference time by nearly 50% and cutting the average decoding steps to 146. Similarly, on ARC-
Challenge, Saber boosts accuracy from 53.51% to 56.19% with an even more substantial reduction in
steps (from 256 to 129.66) and inference time. These results strongly confirm that the core mechanisms
of Saber are not limited to tasks with strict structural constraints like code. Instead, Saber serves as a
highly generalized, task-agnostic efficient sampling strategy for diffusion language models across diverse
application scenarios.
Table 6: Performance comparison on MATH-500 and ARC-Challenge benchmarks.
Method
MATH-500
ARC-Challenge
Pass@1 ↑
Step ↓
Time ↓
Pass@1 ↑
Step ↓
Time ↓
Baseline
0.3240
256
3:01:02
0.5351
256
1:49:51
Saber
0.3400
146.00
1:31:15
0.5619
129.66
0:49:02
F
Performance in Long-Context Scenarios
To explore the sampling efficiency and correction behavior of diffusion language models under longer
input conditions, we evaluated Saber in long-context scenarios on tasks with input lengths between 512
and 4096 tokens. Although long-context generation presents a significant challenge for DLMs, Saber
demonstrates remarkable robustness, achieving more than three times the Pass rate of the baseline method,
as shown in Table 7.
Table 7: Performance comparison in long-context scenarios (input lengths between 512 and 4096 tokens).
Method
Performance
↑∆
Baseline
1.4%
-
Saber (Ours)
4.3%
+207.2%
3639

G
Hyperparameter Impact.
We conduct a hyperparameter impact analysis of the backtracking ratio µ on the HumanEval benchmark
to evaluate the robustness of our approach. As shown in Table 8, Saber demonstrates strong robustness:
the Pass@1 performance remains consistently high across a wide range of µ values (from 1/8 to 1/2).
Crucially, all these configurations significantly outperform the baseline setting where no backtracking is
applied (µ = 0, yielding a Pass@1 of 0.3523). This confirms that while the exact choice of µ offers a
flexible trade-off between inference speed and accuracy, the backtracking mechanism itself provides a
stable and substantial quality improvement regardless of minor hyperparameter variations.
Table 8: Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis of the backtracking ratio µ.
µ
Pass@1 ↑
Steps ↓
Time ↓
1/2
0.4512
158.40
59:12
1/4
0.4451
128.55
48:54
1/8
0.4512
118.92
41:55
1/16
0.3963
109.93
39:59
0 (w/o Backtracking-Enhanced Remasking)
0.3523
65.67
28:30
H
Extended Results of Generalizability across Different DLMs
To further validate the generalizability of Saber, we conducted broader evaluation on the MBPP and
MBPP-ET datasets in our default setting. As detailed in Table 9, Saber achieves consistent improvements
in Pass@1 scores, alongside significant reductions in decoding steps and inference time, across LLaDA,
Dream, and DiffuCoder.
Table 9: Broader testing of Saber on MBPP and MBPP-ET benchmarks across different DLMs.
Base Model
Method
MBPP ↑
MBPP-ET ↑
Step ↓
Time ↓
LLaDA
Baseline
0.4286
0.3138
256
3:12:08
Ours
0.4473
0.3302
110.96
1:33:33
Dream
Baseline
0.6182
0.4637
256
2:38:03
Ours
0.6206
0.4660
131.48
1:26:16
DiffuCoder
Baseline
0.5152
0.3677
256
2:42:28
Ours
0.5691
0.4192
125.65
1:20:51
I
Extended Related Work
I.1
Code Generation
Since the advent of artificial intelligence in the 1950s, code generation has been considered the Holy
Grail of computer science research (Gulwani et al., 2017). With the rapid expansion of codebases and
the increasing capacity of deep learning models, using deep learning for program generation has shown
great potential and practicality (Raychev et al., 2014; Ling et al., 2016; Dong et al., 2024, 2025b; Jiang
et al., 2024, 2025). In recent years, the rise of pre-training techniques has brought new momentum to
the field of code generation. For example, studies like CodeT5 (Wang et al., 2021) and UniXcoder (Guo
et al., 2022) pre-train models for code generation tasks. With the continual increase in model parameters,
researchers have discovered emergent phenomena in LLMs, leading to new breakthroughs . Against this
backdrop, LLMs such as AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022b), Codex (Chen et al., 2021a), Starcoder (Li et al.,
2023), CodeLlama (Rozière et al., 2023), and DeepSeek Coder (Guo et al., 2024) have emerged.
3640

J
Detailed Experimental Setup
In this section, we present the setups of our experiments below.
J.1
Datasets
We conduct experiments on five code generation datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of Saber,
including HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021b), MBPP (Austin et al., 2021b), HumanEval-ET and MBPP-ET
(Dong et al., 2025a), and LiveCodeBench (Jain et al., 2025). For all datasets, tasks are presented in a
zero-shot format.
• HumanEval is a widely used benchmark for evaluating LLMs’ ability to generate correct Python
functions from docstrings.
• MBPP (Mostly Basic Python Problems) consists of small-to-medium Python programming tasks
designed to test basic algorithmic reasoning.
• LiveCodeBench is a contamination-aware benchmark that continuously collects new programming
problems from contest platforms (LeetCode, AtCoder, Codeforces) and focuses beyond simple code
generation to broader code reasoning capabilities.
• HumanEval-ET and MBPP-ET are extended versions of the original HumanEval and MBPP. They
augment each task with over 100 additional test cases and include edge-case tests, which enhance the
reliability of the evaluation.
J.2
Baselines
We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of Saber against established baseline decoding methods for DLMs.
The results confirm that Saber achieves superior performance, effectively validating its effectiveness.
• Standard DLM sampling (Default):In this mode, DLM generates responses by continuously
decoding over a predetermined full output length. The decoding methods include confidence-based,
entropy-based, and random approaches.
• Efficient DLM sampling Methods, including: Semi-autoregressive (SAR) (Nie et al., 2025):
This strategy decodes in blocks from left to right. It thus combines aspects of autoregressive order
with diffusion’s simultaneous updates. Within each block, tokens are decoded based on confidence;
parallelism increase (p): increasing the number of tokens per sampling; WINO (Hong et al., 2025):
using a fixed threshold for acceleration; Fast-dLLM (Wu et al., 2025): using cache for acceleration;
and ReMDM (Wang et al., 2025): using a fixed threshold for remasking.
• Parallelism Increase (p), Semi-autoregressive (SAR) (Nie et al., 2025), WINO (Hong et al., 2025),
Fast-dLLM (Wu et al., 2025), and ReMDM (Wang et al., 2025) are recently proposed efficient
DLM sampling methods.
J.3
Metric
Our evaluation employs Pass@1 as the primary metric. It is calculated as the percentage of problems for
which the generated code passes all test cases with a single attempt. The formula is as follows:
pass@1 =
1
|N|
|N|
X
i=1
I(Passed(Generationi))
where |N| is the total number of problems, and the indicator function I(·) is 1 if the single generation for
a given problem passes all its test cases, and 0 otherwise.
In addition to performance, we also measure the Step (i.e., average generation steps per sample) and
Time (i.e., total generation time).
3641

J.4
Implementation Details
In this paper, we employ the LLaDA-8B-Instruct (Nie et al., 2025) as the base model for our experiments.
The default temperature for all baselines is set at 0 for consistency. In the fixed-length decoding scenario,
we set the generation length to 256 tokens. For the semi-autoregressive approach, the block length was
configured to 128. All other efficient DLM sampling methods follow the same configuration as their
original paper. To mitigate the instability of model sampling, we report the average results of five trials
in the experiments. All experiments were conducted on a workstation equipped with 8 NVIDIA A6000
GPUs (48GB each) and 1TB RAM, with a single GPU for each experiment.
3642
