Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 43997–44020
July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Bitter Lesson of Diffusion Language Models for Agentic Workflows:
A Comprehensive Reality Check
Qingyu Lu♢✿†, Liang Ding♡†, Kanjian Zhang♢♠*, Jinxia Zhang♢, Dacheng Tao✿
♢Southeast University ♡Alibaba ♠Southeast University Shenzhen Research Institute
✿College of Computing and Data Science at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
{luqingyu,kjzhang,jinxiazhang}@seu.edu.cn, {liangding.liam,dacheng.tao}@gmail.com
https://coldmist-lu.github.io/DiffuAgent/
Abstract
The pursuit of real-time agentic interaction has
driven interest in Diffusion-based Large Lan-
guage Models (dLLMs) as alternatives to auto-
regressive backbones, promising to break the
sequential latency bottleneck. However, does
such efficiency gains translate into effective
agentic behavior? In this work, we present
a comprehensive evaluation of dLLMs (e.g.,
LLaDA, Dream) across two distinct agentic
paradigms: Embodied Agents (requiring long-
horizon planning) and Tool-Calling Agents (re-
quiring precise formatting).
Contrary to the efficiency hype, our results on
Agentboard and BFCL reveal a "bitter lesson":
current dLLMs fail to serve as reliable agen-
tic backbones, frequently leading to systematic
failure. (1) In Embodied settings, dLLMs suf-
fer repeated attempts, failing to branch under
temporal feedback. (2) In Tool-Calling set-
tings, dLLMs fail to maintain symbolic preci-
sion (e.g. strict JSON schemas) under diffusion
noise. To assess the potential of dLLMs in
agentic workflows, we introduce DiffuAgent,
a multi-agent evaluation framework that inte-
grates dLLMs as plug-and-play cognitive cores.
Our analysis shows that dLLMs are effective in
non-causal roles (e.g., memory summarization
and tool selection) but require the incorporation
of causal, precise, and logically grounded rea-
soning mechanisms into the denoising process
to be viable for agentic tasks.
1
Introduction
Agents powered by large language models (LLMs,
Yang et al., 2025a; Jiang et al., 2024) have demon-
strated strong capabilities in planning and complex
reasoning (Wang et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2025), par-
ticularly in embodied task-solving environments
(Feng et al., 2025; Chang et al., 2024) and tool-
calling scenarios (Liu et al., 2025a; Patil et al.,
* Corresponding Author.
† Equal contribution. Work done while Qingyu was a
visiting researcher at Nanyang Technological University.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Embodied Tasks (%)
Qwen
79
Ministral
113
DVar
167
Dream
5
Llada
44
FdLLM
151
Throughput
(tok./s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Tool-Calling Tasks (%)
Figure 1: Performance–Efficiency Trade-offs in Em-
bodied and Tool-Calling Tasks. Despite higher infer-
ence efficiency, FdLLM-7B and DVar-8B do not guaran-
tee comparable agentic performance to autoregressive
LLMs. Llada-8B and Dream-7B fall behind LLMs in
both task performance and efficiency.
2025). However, such agentic systems often suf-
fer from a sequential latency bottleneck, where
multi-turn interactions incur substantial inference
overhead, demanding faster reasoning and more
efficient decision-making.
In this context, Diffusion-based Large Language
Models (dLLMs, Nie et al., 2025) have attracted
attention as alternatives to auto-regressive back-
bones, owing to their higher inference efficiency
enabled by parallel decoding, while maintaining
competitive general performance (Wu et al., 2025a;
Ye et al., 2025). However, does such efficiency
gains translate into effective agentic behavior?
In this work, we present a comprehensive reality
check of dLLMs, focusing on their long-horizon
planning capabilities as Embodied Agents and pre-
cise formatting capabilities as Tool-Calling Agents.
Contrary to the efficiency hype, our results (as
shown in Figure 1) on four representative dLLMs
across AgentBoard (Chang et al., 2024) and BFCL
43997

Embodied Agent
Tool-Calling Agent
Diffusion 
Logic
Correct 
Logic
try other solutions
retry loop
task failure
tool call
imprecise tool-calling
task solve
task failure
apples not found
apples not found
Figure 2: An Overview of Systematic Failures in dLLMs. In embodied agent settings, dLLMs tend to repetitively
retry the same action instead of exploring alternative plans. In tool-calling agent settings, imprecise or unstable tool
invocation further leads to execution failures.
(Patil et al., 2025) reveal a bitter lesson: current
dLLMs fail to serve as reliable agentic backbones,
particularly in multi-turn interaction scenarios, ex-
hibiting systematic failure behaviors. Specifically,
(1) in embodied settings, dLLMs tend to become
trapped in repetitive action loops, failing to branch
into alternative plans; (2) in tool-calling settings,
dLLMs struggle to maintain symbolic precision
when generating tool invocations, frequently vio-
lating strict JSON schemas or hallucinating API
parameters, potentially due to diffusion-induced
noise, as illustrated in Figure 2.
To provide deeper insights into the agentic be-
havior of dLLMs, we further introduce DiffuAgent,
a novel evaluation framework that treats dLLMs
as plug-and-play cognitive modules for augment-
ing LLM-based agents, enabling systematic assess-
ment under different agentic roles. Our results
show that dLLMs can be effective when deployed
in non-causal roles, such as memory summariza-
tion (Xu et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025c), redundant
trajectory detection (Lu et al., 2025), and relevant
tool selection (Liu et al., 2025b).
Our contributions are three-fold:
• We present the first systematic study of
dLLMs as agentic backbones, revealing con-
sistent and previously underexplored failure
modes in multi-turn agentic reasoning.
• We propose DiffuAgent, the first evaluation
framework that integrates dLLMs as four dis-
tinct cognitive modules within a multi-agent
setting to better assess agentic behavior.
• We provide extensive empirical evidence
showing that dLLMs are effective mainly in
non-causal roles, but remain weak in causal
planning and formatting–critical scenarios.
This study serves as a foundational step toward
Diffusion-native Agents. By bridging the gap be-
tween non-autoregressive generation and agentic
workflows, we highlight a promising direction for
future dLLM development, enabling real-time inter-
action without compromising causal, precise, and
logically grounded reasoning capabilities.
2
Preliminaries
2.1
Embodied Agents
Embodied agents operate in interactive environ-
ments (e.g., household or virtual worlds), where
an LLM acts as the central controller, selecting
actions based on accumulated interaction history.
This multi-turn decision process can be formalized
as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP), in which the agent follows a policy πθ
at each time step t to choose the next action at:
at ∼πθ(· | e1:t−1, utask),
where trajectory e1:t−1 = (a1, o1, . . . , at−1, ot−1)
consists of past actions (a1, . . . , at−1) and corre-
sponding observations (o1, . . . , ot−1), and utask de-
notes contextual information associated with the
specific task and initial environment configuration.
To elicit reasoning capabilities, we adopt ReAct
(Yao et al., 2023) for evaluating embodied agents,
a widely-used agentic workflow that synergizes
planning and decision-making in multi-turn inter-
actions. This process can be formulated as:
[qt, at] = πθ(· | e1:t−1, utask),
43998

where the LLM agent generates an intermediate
thought qt before producing action at.
2.2
Tool-Calling Agents
Agentic LLMs are expected to exhibit effective
tool-calling (also referred to as function-calling)
capabilities, where the agent is equipped with exter-
nal tools and must decide whether, when, and how
to invoke them to solve complex tasks (Patil et al.,
2025). This setting can be viewed as a special case
of the agentic interaction paradigm, where, at each
interaction turn, the agent is provided with a set
of available tool descriptions D = {τ1, . . . , τN}
instead of interacting with a complex environment,
and attempts to fulfill the user request uuser by gen-
erating one or more structured tool invocations as
actions. This formats as
C = {(τi, αi)}K
i=1 ∼πθ(· | uuser, D),
(1)
where πθ denotes the agent policy model, C is the
set of generated tool calls, τi denotes the i-th se-
lected tool, and αi denotes argument. Each gener-
ated tool call is then executed by its associated tool,
yielding a set of execution results:
O = Exec(C) = { τi(αi) | (τi, αi) ∈C },
(2)
where the execution results O for all results are
returned to the agent as feedback, based on which
the agent decides whether further tool calls are
required. The interaction terminates when the agent
determines that the user request has been resolved
or when a predefined step limit is reached.
2.3
Diffusion-based LLMs
Autoregressive LLMs follow a next-token predic-
tion paradigm (Luo et al., 2025), in which tokens
are decoded sequentially, one at a time. This in-
herent sequential nature limits decoding efficiency,
particularly in generation-intensive scenarios. In-
spired by diffusion probabilistic modeling (Yang
et al., 2023), dLLMs originally developed for con-
tinuous domains such as images (Amit et al., 2021)
and audio (Nam et al., 2025). Rather than relying
on strict left-to-right generation, dLLMs generate
tokens in parallel, offering greater potential for ef-
ficient inference acceleration (Wu et al., 2025b).
As the parallel generation and sampling strategies
differ slightly among the selected dLLMs, we ex-
plore different dLLMs and several optimization
techniques during decoding stage.
☞See Appendix A for a detailed summary of the
decoding strategies of the selected dLLMs.
3
Experimental Setup
3.1
Evaluation Data
Datasets
We evaluate embodied agents using
AgentBoard (Chang et al., 2024) across three in-
teractive environments: AlfWorld (Shridhar et al.,
2021) (134 household tasks), ScienceWorld (Wang
et al., 2022) (90 scientific experiments), and
BabyAI (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019) (112 grid-
based navigation and interaction tasks).
Tool-
calling agentic ability is assessed on BFCL-v3
(Patil et al., 2025). We sample at most 50 instances
per BFCL-v3 category (using all samples when
fewer than 50 are available), yielding 758 evalua-
tion examples in total covering all categories.
☞See Appendix B for detailed dataset descriptions,
including their settings and example instances.
Metrics
For embodied agents, we report both
success rate and progress rate. Success rate mea-
sures the proportion of tasks successfully com-
pleted by an agent, while progress rate (Chang
et al., 2024) quantifies how much an agent advances
toward the task goal, making it a more informative
metric for evaluating incremental improvements.
For tool-calling evaluation, we adopt the official
BFCL evaluation suite and report the percentage of
successful instances as our primary metric.
3.2
Agentic Backbones
LLMs
We consider open-source LLMs under
10B parameters for reproducibility and efficiency.
Specifically, we use Qwen-8B (Yang et al., 2025a),
adopting the non-thinking variant to meet real-time
latency constraints1, and Ministral-8B (Jiang et al.,
2024), an instruction-tuned 8B model. Both models
are evaluated in text-only settings2.
dLLMs
We employ four recent dLLMs in our
experiments: Llada-8B (Nie et al., 2025), a strong
diffusion LLM with general performance competi-
tive with Llama3-8B; Dream-7B (Ye et al., 2025),
which is initialized from Qwen2.5-7B weights and
adopts token-level noise rescheduling for context-
adaptive denoising; FdLLM-7B (Fast-dLLM v2;
Wu et al., 2025a), a block-diffusion model enabling
parallel decoding within each block for efficient
inference; and DVar-8B (dLLM-Var; Yang et al.,
2025b), which supports native variable-length gen-
eration via accurate EOS prediction.
1https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-8B
2https://huggingface.co/mistralai/
Ministral-3-8B-Instruct-2512
43999

Embodied
Agent
AlfWorld
ScienceWorld
BabyAI
Avg.
Success
Progress
Success
Progress
Success
Progress
Success
Progress
Qwen-8B
76.1 ±0.8
85.6 ±0.3
26.7 ±2.2
55.1 ±0.3
32.1 ±0.9
45.7 ±1.0
45.0 ±0.2
62.1 ±0.5
Ministral-8B
45.5 ±1.1
66.2 ±0.6
13.3 ±1.7
52.0 ±0.1
36.6 ±1.4
46.6 ±1.0
31.8 ±0.7
54.9 ±0.5
Llada-8B
5.2 ±0.4
18.5 ±0.6
1.1 ±0.0
8.6 ±0.4
16.1 ±0.9
22.0 ±1.3
7.5 ±0.2
16.4 ±0.4
Dream-7B
0.7 ±0.0
6.0 ±0.1
0.6 ±0.6
5.3 ±0.2
8.9 ±0.5
14.8 ±0.5
3.4 ±0.1
8.7 ±0.2
FdLLM-7B
3.3 ±3.3
7.8 ±3.3
0.7 ±0.6
6.4 ±1.2
5.4 ±0.5
12.6 ±2.2
3.1 ±1.3
8.9 ±1.5
DVar-8B
0.7 ±0.0
10.0 ±0.0
0.0 ±0.0
1.9 ±0.0
5.4 ±0.0
15.0 ±0.0
2.0 ±0.0
8.9 ±0.0
Table 1: Comparison of Success Rate (%) and Progress Rate (%) across different LLMs and dLLMs on three
Embodied tasks. Best results are highlighted in bold. The lower-right fluctuation values indicate the variability
estimated from 3 runs, showing the possible effect of error propagation.
Tool-Calling
Agent
Non-Live
Single-Turn Live
Multi-Turn
Hallucination
Overall
Avg.
S.
M.
P.
PM.
Avg.
Standard
Challenge
Avg.
Rel.
Irrel.
Qwen-8B
87.5
82.0
80.0
75.0
75.0
78.0
20.0
10.0
12.5
94.4
68.0
57.8
Ministral-8B
49.8
74.0
70.0
50.0
45.8
60.0
2.0
4.7
4.0
66.7
58.0
39.5
Llada-8B
23.0
8.0
26.0
0.0
12.5
11.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
66.7
56.0
19.4
Dream-7B
4.2
2.0
4.0
0.0
0.0
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.8
77.0
13.6
FdLLM-7B
1.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.6
99.0
15.0
DVar-8B
35.0
56.0
22.0
37.5
20.8
34.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
44.4
63.0
28.0
Table 2: Comparison of Success Rates (%) across different LLMs and dLLMs as Tool-Calling agents. S., M., P.
and PM. denote simple, multiple, parallel, and a combination of parallel and multiple tool-calling tasks, respectively.
Hallucination indicates whether a tool call is required (Rel.) or not required (Irrel.). Best results are in bold.
3.3
Deployment Details
For fair comparison, we allocate one NVIDIA
A800 (80GB) GPU per model. When two mod-
els are used in multi-agent scenarios (Section 6),
two GPUs are deployed accordingly. We do not
employ distributed inference. AR models (Qwen-
8B, Ministral-8B) are deployed with vLLM (Kwon
et al., 2023) and accessed via OpenAI Chat APIs
(Achiam et al., 2023). Diffusion LLMs (Dream-
7B, Llada-8B, FdLLM-7B) are reproduced using
NVIDIA Fast-dLLM3 and served through FastAPI.
3.4
Prompts
For embodied agents, we adopt a ReAct-style
prompt format for multi-turn planning and action
generation. For BFCL, we follow the official im-
plementation and build an OpenAI API version to
match the input templates of different models.
☞See Appendix F for the prompts used.
4
Failure of dLLMs as Agent Backbone
4.1
Failure of Replan: Embodied Agents
dLLMs significantly underperform LLMs
Ta-
ble 1 summarizes the performance of embodied
3https://github.com/NVlabs/Fast-dLLM
agents with LLM and dLLM backbones. Across
all environments, dLLMs consistently underper-
form LLMs, achieving success rates below 10%
in most settings, with the only exception being
Llada-8B on BabyAI; in some cases, they fail to
solve any tasks (0.0%) in ScienceWorld. Progress-
rate performance exhibits a similar pattern: almost
all progress rates fall below 20%, suggesting that
dLLM agents are unable to complete even one sub-
goal on average. This gap is striking given the
competitive performance of dLLMs on general lan-
guage benchmarks, demonstrating that such gains
fundamentally fail to transfer to agentic scenarios
requiring long-horizon planning.
Retry loops as a systematic failure mode
To
further investivate the failure mode of dLLMs as
embodied agents, we follow Shinn et al. (2023)
to define retry loop as three or more consecutive
repetitive actions and report their frequency across
different backbones. As shown in Figure 3, dLLMs
exhibit significantly more frequent retry loops than
auto-regressive LLMs, repeatedly generating the
same action without exploring alternatives. This in-
dicates an over-reliance on recent context, whereas
LLM-based agents exhibit more causal decision
44000

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
No. of Retry-loop Failures
DVar
FdLLM
Dream
LLaDA
Ministral
Qwen3
AlfWorld
ScienceWorld
BabyAI
Figure 3: Comparison of Retry-Loop Failures across
LLMs and dLLMs. A retry-loop is defined as repeatedly
executing the same action for more than 3 consecutive
steps during task completion.
patterns and experiences (Sun et al., 2025) by lever-
aging prior interactions to branch into new actions.
Effect of Error Propagation
Since embodied
agents may interact with the environment for up
to 30 iterations, they are likely to accumulate er-
ror propagation over time. We therefore run each
embodied setting for 3 runs and report the fluctua-
tion values in Table 1. Most success-rate changes
remain within 1%, and most progress-rate fluctu-
ations stay within 2%. The most volatile case is
FdLLM-7B, whose success rate shows a fluctua-
tion of ±3.8%, suggesting that decoding changes
may substantially affect the final outcome. This is
consistent with Appendix D.1: changing FdLLM-
7B from vanilla decoding to Deferred Commitment
Decoding (DCD, Shu et al., 2026) raises its ALF-
World success rate from 3.3 to 10.4.4
4.2
Failure of Precision: Tool-Calling Agents
dLLMs underperform LLMs on both single–
turn and multi-turn tool-callings
Table 2 sum-
marizes the tool-calling results. Consistent with
embodied settings, dLLMs underperform auto-
regressive LLMs in both single-turn5 and multi-
turn scenarios. Among dLLMs, DVar-8B achieves
better single-turn performance but remains subopti-
mal. Notably, the multi-turn setting is particularly
challenging for dLLMs, as none succeeds on any
test instance. The high irrelevance score (Irrel.)
4Since the BFCL test set has been rebuilt in the latest
update and BFCL contains many single-turn cases, making
the chance of error propagation is relatively low compared
with embodied tasks. Therefore, we do not report multi-run
fluctuation for BFCL.
5The single-turn average is computed by excluding hal-
lucination categories, which differs from the original BFCL
implementation.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
No. of Tool-Calling Errors
DVar
FdLLM
Dream
LLaDA
Ministral
Qwen
JSON Schema Error
Parameter / Value Error
Wrong Function
Figure 4: Comparison of the number of tool-calling
failure categories across LLMs and dLLMs.
of FdLLM-7B arises from frequent incorrect tool
calls that are classified as irrelevant actions.
Imprecise tool-call formats as a systematic fail-
ure mode
We further summarize tool-calling fail-
ures under single-turn Live and Non-Live settings
by categorizing their error types according to Ab-
stract Syntax Tree (AST) evaluation. As shown in
Figure 4, JSON schema errors and parameter/value
errors dominate for both LLMs and dLLMs. How-
ever, compared to LLMs, dLLMs are more prone
to produce malformed JSON schemas, except for
Llada-8B, which more often exhibits missing pa-
rameters or values. These fuzzy or ill-formed for-
mats lead to tool execution failures, indicating that
dLLMs struggle to adhere to the strict structural
constraints required for tool invocation.
4.3
Failure of Efficiency-Performance
Trade-off
As efficiency has become a key consideration for
dLLMs, Figure 1 compares efficiency and per-
formance across models. Despite achieving high
throughput (above 150 tokens/s), FdLLM-7B and
DVar-8B exhibit the worst embodied-task perfor-
mance, with average success rates below 2%. In
contrast, auto-regressive LLMs such as Qwen-8B
and Ministral-8B achieve stronger tool-calling and
embodied reasoning performance while maintain-
ing acceptable latency. These results show that
efficiency gains in dLLMs do not directly translate
into improved agentic performance.
4.4
Bitter Lesson: Non-causal and Fuzzy
Nature of dLLMs
From the above analysis, we observe a fundamen-
tal limitation of dLLMs: despite their efficiency
gains, parallel decoding weakens causal depen-
44001

dency and induces fuzzy intermediate states,
hindering stable commitment to partial plans or
structured outputs. This aligns with established
challenges in non-autoregressive generation, where
the conditional independence assumption has been
shown to cause ‘uncoordinated’ structural predic-
tions in slot filling (Wu et al., 2020) and ‘lexical
choice errors’, particularly for low-frequency to-
kens, in machine translation (Ding et al., 2021). As
a result, dLLMs perform poorly on long-horizon
reasoning and strictly structured tasks, serving as a
bitter lesson that they should be used with caution
as backbone models in agentic workflows requiring
strong temporal or symbolic consistency.
Importantly, these results do not suggest that
dLLMs are ineffective in agentic systems. Since
agentic tasks often require heterogeneous capabili-
ties, we further examine the collaboration between
dLLMs and LLMs in multi-agent workflows to
clarify the role of dLLMs in agentic scenarios.
☞See Appendix C for more rigorous definitions
and theoretical explanations of the non-causal and
fuzzy failure patterns of dLLMs.
4.5
Extended Validation
dLLM Optimization Techniques
We further ex-
amine whether recent dLLM optimization tech-
niques could change our main conclusion. These
methods improve performance, but do not close
the agentic gap. In particular, Adaptive Parallel
Decoding (APD) and Discrete Diffusion Forcing
(D2F) bring only limited gains for Dream-7B on
embodied tasks, while DCD improves FdLLM-7B
on ALFWorld but remains limited on ScienceWorld
and BabyAI. On tool-calling tasks, APD, D2F, and
DCD all improve BFCL accuracy, yet a substantial
gap from strong AR LLMs remains.
Agent-Level Optimization
We also examine
whether agent-level optimization, such as exter-
nal refinement or feedback from AR LLMs, could
mitigate the weakness of dLLM agents. These
strategies provide limited gains and do not overturn
our conclusion. AR self-refine raises the success
rate from 0.7% to 1.5%, while periodic or step-wise
AR feedback raises it to 2.2%, and the progress rate
from 10.0% to 15.2–15.4%. These gains suggest
that external feedback can partially stabilize dLLM
agents, but remain insufficient to close the gap.
Other Agentic Benchmarks
We further exam-
ine whether the same limitation extends to other
agentic benchmarks through Tau-Bench mock.
Qwen-8B is the only model that achieves a non-
zero score, while the tested dLLM settings either
remain at zero pass rate or fail because of response-
format incompatibility.
Schema-Checking Methods
We further exam-
ine whether lightweight schema-checking heuris-
tics or structural guardrails could remove the main
weakness of dLLMs in tool calling. Even when
all three guardrails are combined, only 21% of out-
puts achieve syntactic recovery, only 14% reach
semantic correctness, and 86% still fail.
☞See Appendix D for detailed settings and addi-
tional experimental results.
5
DiffuAgent: A Multi-Agent Evaluation
Framework on Analyzing Agentic
Behaviors in dLLMs
To better understand the agentic potential of
dLLMs, we introduce DiffuAgent, which inte-
grates dLLMs as plug-and-play cognitive modules
to augment auto-regressive LLMs. As shown in
Figure 5, rather than letting dLLMs run the entire
agent loop, DiffuAgent assigns them to individual
functional modules, including memory, verifica-
tion, and tool-related selection or format editing.
This multi-agent modular design allows us to study
their strengths and weaknesses more clearly, with-
out confusing them with overall agent failures.
5.1
Modules in Embodied Agents
Pre-hoc: Memory
We incorporate a memory-
augmented module to compress long interaction
histories while preserving salient information for
agentic decision-making. The agent periodically
summarizes past trajectories into a textual memory
every kmem steps6, reusing the existing memory
otherwise. This process is formulated as
m′ = Memory(m, et−kmem:t−1, utask) .
(3)
During the subsequent kmem decision steps, the
policy conditions on the compressed memory to-
gether with a short-term interaction history elatest
consisting of the most recent steps:
[qt, at] = πθ
 · | m′, elatest, utask

.
(4)
This design facilitates evaluation of agents under
memory compression, where inaccurate memory
updates may hinder information preservation and
induce erroneous or cyclic behaviors.
6The memory module is invoked every kmem = 5 steps in
our experiments, while the last two interactions are always
retained to preserve recent context.
44002

Figure 5: Overview of DiffuAgent. The framework integrates four modules. For embodied agents, we introduce a
memory-augmented module for history compression and an early-exit verifier for global trajectory checking. For
tool-calling agents, we include a tool selector over the library and a JSON format editor.
Post-hoc: Early-Exit Verifier
To evaluate an
agent’s self-awareness of being stuck, we follow
(Lu et al., 2025) to incorporate an early-exit verifi-
cation module built on an LLM or dLLM backbone.
The verifier is triggered every kearlyexit steps7 and
is prompted to determine whether the agent has
entered a deadlock or repetitive loop. This verifica-
tion process can be formulated as:
Verifier(e1:t, utask) ∈{0, 1}
(5)
A binary decision is then used to terminate the
episode early, reducing unnecessary generation
steps and improving overall efficiency.
5.2
Modules in Tool-Calling Agents
Pre-hoc: Tool Selector
Existing tool-calling
workflows suffer from a mismatch between large
tool libraries and task-specific needs, which in-
creases decision complexity and leads to inefficient
or erroneous tool use. We introduce a pre-hoc tool
selection module that filters the full tool set and
provides a condensed subset of relevant tools prior
to tool calling. Formally, at each interaction turn,
given the user message uuser and the full tool set
D, the tool selector produces a reduced tool subset:
D′ ⊆D,
D′ = Selector(uuser, D),
(6)
where D′ contains only tools deemed relevant to
the current user request. The selected tool sub-
set D′ is then provided to the tool-calling agent,
7We set kearlyexit = 5 in our experiments.
which performs tool invocation conditioned on the
reduced action space:
C′ ∼πθ(· | uuser, D′).
(7)
Post-hoc: Tool-Call Editor
Although tool calls
may select correct tools and parameters, they often
violate the required JSON schema, leading to exe-
cution failures. We therefore introduce a tool-call
editor that post-processes malformed outputs into
schema-compliant formats, enabling post-hoc eval-
uation of structural adherence without altering the
selected function or parameters.
6
Analysis of Agentic Behaviors in
dLLMs
We analyze the behavior of dLLMs within the Dif-
fuAgent framework under multi-agent settings.
6.1
dLLMs Are Competitive Memory
Modules for Memory-Augmented Agents
In memory-augmented agents, incorporating a
memory module generally improves performance
over the w/o baseline across tasks (Table 3), in-
dicating effective preservation of useful informa-
tion. An exception is BabyAI, where long obser-
vation strings at each step may hinder effective
memory summarization and lead to marginal or
negative gains. Comparing memory backbones,
dLLMs achieve performance comparable to Qwen-
8B, suggesting their potential as memory modules.
44003

Model
AlfWorld
ScienceWorld
BabyAI
Avg.
Agent
Memory
Success
Progress
Success
Progress
Success
Progress
Success
Progress
Qwen-8B
w/o
36.6
59.5
20.0
53.2
28.6
39.0
28.4
50.6
Qwen-8B
54.5
72.8
28.9
59.5
21.4
32.2
34.9
54.8
Llada-8B
67.2
81.1
31.1
61.9
23.2
35.9
40.5
59.6
Dream-7B
64.9
77.4
31.1
60.8
20.5
33.6
38.9
57.3
FdLLM-7B
57.5
72.8
28.9
56.5
20.5
35.2
35.6
54.8
DVar-8B
61.2
76.6
26.7
58.4
24.1
35.4
37.3
56.8
Ministral-8B
w/o
22.4
43.7
17.8
57.6
33.0
44.2
24.4
48.5
Ministral-8B
32.8
60.7
34.4
65.7
33.9
45.5
33.7
57.3
Llada-8B
37.3
62.5
28.9
67.2
29.5
41.3
31.9
57.0
Dream-7B
39.6
63.5
26.7
60.9
25.9
37.3
30.7
53.9
FdLLM-7B
27.6
50.6
16.7
51.0
24.1
35.7
22.8
45.8
DVar-8B
35.8
59.7
24.4
58.0
29.5
39.8
29.9
52.5
Table 3: Performance comparison of memory-augmented agents across different LLMs and dLLMs on three
embodied environments. "w/o" indicates no memory, retaining only recent interactions.
0
4
8
12
16
20
Redundant Steps Reduced (#)
4
8
12
16
20
Progress Degradation (%)
ALFWorld
ScienceWorld
BabyAI
Qwen3-8B
Ministral-8B
Llada-8B
Dream-7B
DVar-8B
FdLLM-7B
Figure 6: Comparison of early-exit behavior across
LLMs and dLLMs. Filled and hollow markers denote
LLM- and dLLM-based verifiers, respectively, while
different marker shapes indicate different tasks.
However, performance varies across environments:
Ministral-8B performs better on BabyAI and Sci-
enceWorld but worse on AlfWorld, which we at-
tribute to its tendency to generate longer thoughts
in ReAct, making summarization more challenging.
This suggests that dLLMs may be less suitable for
lengthy and complex reasoning traces.
6.2
LLM Verifiers Tend to Trigger Premature
Early Exits, Whereas dLLMs Terminate
More Reliably
To better assess whether dLLMs can provide early
termination through self-awareness based on exist-
ing trajectories, we select the four best-performing
trajectories from memory-augmented embodied
agents8 and apply early-exit verifiers implemented
with different LLMs or dLLMs. We compute the
two efficiency metrics, redundancy reduction and
progress degradation9 across embodied tasks with
different backbones and report them in Figure 6.
An interesting phenomenon is that Auto-regressive
LLMs exhibit more aggressive early exits, sharply
reducing redundancy but causing severe progress
loss, whereas dLLM-based verifiers behave more
conservatively, achieving smaller redundancy re-
ductions with less degradation, likely due to their
global trajectory awareness.
6.3
dLLMs Are Effective Tool Selectors but
Struggle as Tool-Call Editors
To further investigate the effectiveness of dLLMs as
tool-calling modules, we adopt the BFCL-v3 multi-
turn benchmark (Patil et al., 2025), using 50 ran-
domly selected instances to construct a 200-sample
test set. The Standard setting involves multi-step
tool interactions across multiple user turns, while
the Challenge setting includes missing functions,
missing parameters, and long-context inputs.
We perform ablations by replacing the selec-
tor and/or editor modules in BFCL multi-turn set-
ting. As shown in Figure 7, LLM-based modules
consistently outperform dLLMs. Among dLLMs,
Llada-8B and Dream-7B serve as relatively effec-
8For the first two trajectories, we use Ministral-8B and
Qwen-8B as both the agent and memory module, and Llada-
8B as the memory module for the remaining settings.
9As illustrated in Lu et al. (2025), redundant steps quantify
the potential for efficiency improvement, while progress degra-
dation measures the loss in performance. These metrics jointly
capture the trade-off between efficiency and performance.
44004

0
5
10
15
Qwen-8B
Ministral-8B
LLaDA-8B
Dream-7B
FdLLM-7B
DVar-8B
Selector
0
5
10
15
BFCL-v3 Multi-Turn Avg. (%)
Editor
0
5
10
15
Selector+Editor
Agent = Qwen-8B
Agent = Ministral-8B
Figure 7: Ablation performance of tool-calling agents on BFCL-v3 Multi-Turn benchmark, evaluated with
different backbone models for the agent modules (Selector and Editor). 0 indicates no successful instance.
tive selectors and editors, achieving performance
comparable to LLM baselines, whereas FdLLM-
7B and DVar-8B degrade performance as editors,
possibly due to imprecise tool calls. Interestingly,
DVar-8Bimproves performance when used as a se-
lector for Qwen-8B but harms Ministral-8B. This
behavior can be attributed to DVar-8B’s tendency
to generate weakly filtered tool subsets, benefiting
Qwen-8B with strong selection capacity but over-
whelming Ministral-8B and reducing task success.
☞See Appendix E and Table 10 for detailed BFCL
multi-turn ablation results.
7
Related Work
Diffusion-based LLMs
dLLMs enable non-
autoregressive generation via parallel denoising,
offering substantial speedups over autoregressive
LLMs. Models such as LLaDA (Nie et al., 2025)
and Dream (Ye et al., 2025) achieve competi-
tive standalone performance, with further improve-
ments from block-based diffusion, KV-cache reuse,
and confidence-aware decoding (Arriola et al.,
2025; Wu et al., 2025b,a). Recent decoding ad-
vances further improve diffusion inference through
APD (Israel et al., 2025), DCD (Shu et al., 2026),
D2F (Wang et al., 2025b), and Residual Context
Diffusion (RCD, Hu et al., 2026). However, dLLM
behavior under multi-turn, causally grounded agen-
tic interaction remains underexplored; we therefore
systematically study dLLMs as cognitive modules
within agentic workflows.
LLM Agents
LLM agents show strong perfor-
mance in embodied reasoning, tool use, and inter-
active decision-making, enabled by expert trajec-
tory training (e.g., ETO (Song et al., 2024), Agent-
FLAN (Chen et al., 2024)), prompt-based reason-
ing frameworks (e.g., ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), Pre-
Act (Fu et al., 2025b), StateFlow (Wu et al., 2024)),
and planning or imitation signals (Lin et al., 2023).
Tool-calling agents further focus on tool selection
(Lumer et al., 2025), planner design (Liu et al.,
2025b), and schema alignment (Lee et al., 2025),
but largely assume autoregressive backbones and
overlook inference efficiency. In contrast, we inves-
tigate efficiency-oriented dLLMs as agentic back-
bones and reveal systematic failures in causally
dependent decision processes.
Agent Verification and Memory
Recent work
studies model- or agent-based verification across
text (Zheng et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2024), code
(Chen et al., 2024), and autonomous agents (Pan
et al., 2024), while memory compression meth-
ods (Xu et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a,c) recover
agent capabilities under limited context windows.
In contrast, we propose a multi-agent evaluation
framework that treats dLLMs as cognitive modules
to better measure its capabilities.
8
Conclusion
We conduct a systematic evaluation of dLLMs in
agentic settings. Despite their inference efficiency,
we first demonstrate the "bitter lesson": dLLMs
are unreliable agentic backbones under multi-turn
interaction, exhibiting repetitive action loops in em-
bodied tasks and imprecise tool calls under strict
formatting constraints. We then introduce DiffuA-
gent, a modular evaluation framework that decom-
poses agentic workflows into plug-and-play cogni-
tive roles. Our analysis shows that dLLMs struggle
with causal planning and formatting-critical tasks,
but remain effective in non-causal roles, such as
memory summarization and tool selection, motivat-
ing diffusion-native agent designs.
44005

Limitations
The limitations of our work are as follows:
• Limited Coverage of dLLMs and Bench-
marks: Our study evaluates a representative
but limited set of diffusion-based LLMs on
AgentBoard and BFCL. We focus on a subset
of the test suites, considering only embodied
AI tasks in AgentBoard while excluding other
scenarios such as web-based tasks. For BFCL,
we restrict our evaluation to versions v1–v3
to capture the core challenges of tool calling.
While we believe our findings are indicative
of the current behavior of dLLMs, they may
not fully generalize to future architectures or
broader agentic settings. We leave a more
comprehensive evaluation to future work.
• Inference-Only Analysis: We focus on the
agentic behavior of post-training dLLMs with-
out incorporating task-specific fine-tuning or
reinforcement learning. Although this set-
ting enables a controlled comparison, targeted
training objectives or architectural adaptations
may alleviate some of the observed failure
modes, which we leave for future work. At
the same time, prior work suggests that sim-
ple fine-tuning often behaves more like be-
havior cloning and may not substantially im-
prove agentic capabilities (Song et al., 2024).
More meaningful gains may require multi-
stage agentic training, such as continued pre-
training or reinforcement learning, which in-
curs substantially higher computational cost.
• Ablation Completeness: Our ablation study
covers only a subset of selector–editor con-
figurations under the DiffAgent framework,
and assumes an LLM-based main workflow
agent. We focus on evaluating dLLMs as aux-
iliary cognitive modules rather than as primary
agents. Exploring dLLMs as the main work-
flow agent is left for future work.
• Fixed Agentic Workflow Assumptions: Dif-
fuAgent evaluates dLLMs by inserting them
into predefined cognitive roles within a fixed
agent pipeline. This modular design facilitates
systematic analysis but may underestimate the
potential of diffusion models in end-to-end
or co-designed agentic systems optimized for
diffusion-native reasoning.
• LLM Self-Awareness: One possible expla-
nation for the observed improvements is the
limited self-verification capability of a single
LLM, where using the same model for both
generation and verification may hinder timely
error detection. In contrast, multi-agent set-
tings with heterogeneous models introduce
distributional diversity that can implicitly fa-
cilitate error correction and improve agentic
performance. While we acknowledge that this
effect may exist, we do not believe it substan-
tially affects our main conclusions. Due to
experimental budget constraints, we do not
explicitly isolate this “self-awareness” effect
and leave a systematic investigation for future
work.
Ethics Statement
We take ethical considerations seriously and con-
duct this research in accordance with established
ethical standards. This work focuses on evaluating
diffusion-based large language models (dLLMs) in
agentic settings and introducing a modular evalua-
tion framework for analyzing their behaviors. The
proposed evaluation framework and analyses do
not introduce prompts or mechanisms intended to
elicit harmful, unsafe, or deceptive outputs from
the models.
All datasets, environments, and models used in
this study are publicly available and widely adopted
in prior research. Our experiments are conducted in
simulated embodied and tool-calling environments,
and no human participants are involved as evalua-
tors or subjects. The study does not collect, process,
or infer any personal or sensitive information.
Our findings highlight limitations and failure
modes of dLLMs in multi-turn agentic interactions,
with the goal of improving transparency, reliabil-
ity, and safety in future agentic system design. We
report all results and conclusions accurately and ob-
jectively, without exaggerating model capabilities
or risks.
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers and the area
chair for their insightful comments and sugges-
tions. This work was completed while Qingyu
Lu was a visiting scholar at Nanyang Techno-
logical University, Singapore, and we thank the
China Scholarship Council for its sponsorship.
This research is supported by the Fundamental Re-
search Funds for the Central Universities under
44006

Grant 2242025F20002, the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China under Grant 61973083,
and the Shenzhen Science and Technology Pro-
gram under Grant JCYJ20210324121213036. Dr
Tao’s research is partially supported by NTU RSR
and Start Up Grants.
References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman,
Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint.
Tomer Amit, Tal Shaharbany, Eliya Nachmani, and Lior
Wolf. 2021. Segdiff: Image segmentation with diffu-
sion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint.
Marianne Arriola, Aaron Gokaslan, Justin T Chiu, Ji-
aqi Han, Zhihan Yang, Zhixuan Qi, Subham Sekhar
Sahoo, and Volodymyr Kuleshov. 2025. Interpolat-
ing autoregressive and discrete denoising diffusion
language models. In ICLR.
Ma Chang, Junlei Zhang, Zhihao Zhu, Cheng Yang,
Yujiu Yang, Yaohui Jin, Zhenzhong Lan, Lingpeng
Kong, and Junxian He. 2024. Agentboard: An an-
alytical evaluation board of multi-turn llm agents.
NeurIPS.
Zehui Chen, Kuikun Liu, Qiuchen Wang, Wenwei
Zhang, Jiangning Liu, Dahua Lin, Kai Chen, and
Feng Zhao. 2024. Agent-FLAN: Designing data and
methods of effective agent tuning for large language
models. In ACL.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem
Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia, Thien Huu
Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. 2019. Babyai: A plat-
form to study the sample efficiency of grounded lan-
guage learning. In ICLR.
Liang Ding, Longyue Wang, Xuebo Liu, Derek F
Wong, Dacheng Tao, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2021. Un-
derstanding and improving lexical choice in non-
autoregressive translation. In ICLR.
Zhaohan Feng, Ruiqi Xue, Lei Yuan, Yang Yu, Ning
Ding, Meiqin Liu, Bingzhao Gao, Jian Sun, Xinhu
Zheng, and Gang Wang. 2025.
Multi-agent em-
bodied ai: Advances and future directions. arXiv
preprint.
Dayuan Fu, Keqing He, Yejie Wang, Wentao Hong,
Zhuoma GongQue, Weihao Zeng, Wei Wang, Jin-
gang Wang, Xunliang Cai, and Weiran Xu. 2025a.
Agentrefine: Enhancing agent generalization through
refinement tuning. In ICLR.
Dayuan Fu, Jianzhao Huang, Siyuan Lu, Guanting
Dong, Yejie Wang, Keqing He, and Weiran Xu.
2025b. PreAct: Prediction enhances agent‘s plan-
ning ability. In COLING.
Yuezhou Hu, Harman Singh, Monishwaran Mah-
eswaran, Haocheng Xi, Coleman Hooper, Jintao
Zhang, Aditya Tomar, Michael W. Mahoney, Sewon
Min, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Kurt Keutzer, Amir Gho-
lami, and Chenfeng Xu. 2026. Residual context dif-
fusion language models. arXiv preprint.
Daniel Israel, Guy Van den Broeck, and Aditya Grover.
2025. Accelerating diffusion llms via adaptive paral-
lel decoding. In NeurIPS.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine
Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bam-
ford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas,
Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al. 2024.
Mixtral of experts. arXiv preprint.
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig,
Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2023. Swe-bench: Can language mod-
els resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying
Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gon-
zalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient
memory management for large language model serv-
ing with pagedattention. In SOSP.
Jonggeun Lee, Woojung Song, Jongwook Han, Hae-
sung Pyun, and Yohan Jo. 2025. Don’t adapt small
language models for tools; adapt tool schemas to the
models. arXiv preprint.
Bill Yuchen Lin, Yicheng Fu, Karina Yang, Faeze Brah-
man, Shiyu Huang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Prithviraj
Ammanabrolu, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. 2023.
Swiftsage: A generative agent with fast and slow
thinking for complex interactive tasks. NeurIPS.
Weiwen Liu, Xu Huang, Xingshan Zeng, Shuai Yu,
Dexun Li, Shuai Wang, Weinan Gan, Zhengying Liu,
Yuanqing Yu, Zezhong WANG, et al. 2025a. Toolace:
Winning the points of llm function calling. In ICLR.
Yanming Liu, Xinyue Peng, Jiannan Cao, Yuwei Zhang,
Xuhong Zhang, Sheng Cheng, Xun Wang, Jianwei
Yin, and Tianyu Du. 2025b. Tool-planner: Task plan-
ning with clusters across multiple tools. In ICLR.
Qingyu Lu, Liang Ding, Siyi Cao, Xuebo Liu, Kan-
jian Zhang, Jinxia Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. 2025.
Runaway is ashamed, but helpful: On the early-exit
behavior of large language model-based agents in
embodied environments. In EMNLP.
Qingyu Lu, Baopu Qiu, Liang Ding, Kanjian Zhang,
Tom Kocmi, and Dacheng Tao. 2024. Error analysis
prompting enables human-like translation evaluation
in large language models. In ACL.
Elias Lumer, Anmol Gulati, Faheem Nizar, Dzmitry
Hedroits,
Atharva
Mehta,
Henry
Hwangbo,
Vamse Kumar Subbiah, Pradeep Honaganahalli
Basavaraju, and James A. Burke. 2025. Tool and
agent selection for large language model agents in
production: A survey. Preprints.
44007

Junyu Luo, Weizhi Zhang, Ye Yuan, Yusheng Zhao, Jun-
wei Yang, Yiyang Gu, Bohan Wu, Binqi Chen, Ziyue
Qiao, Qingqing Long, et al. 2025. Large language
model agent: A survey on methodology, applications
and challenges. arXiv preprint.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler
Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang,
Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder,
Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-
bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative
refinement with self-feedback. In NeurIPS.
KiHyun Nam, Jongmin Choi, Hyeongkeun Lee, Jung-
woo Heo, and Joon Son Chung. 2025. Diffusion-link:
Diffusion probabilistic model for bridging the audio-
text modality gap. arXiv preprint.
Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Xiaolu Zhang,
Jingyang Ou, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong
Wen, and Chongxuan Li. 2025. Large language dif-
fusion models. NeurIPS.
Jiayi Pan, Yichi Zhang, Nicholas Tomlin, Yifei Zhou,
Sergey Levine, and Alane Suhr. 2024. Autonomous
evaluation and refinement of digital agents.
In
COLM.
Shishir G. Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji,
Fanjia Yan, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and Joseph
E. Gonzalez. 2025. The berkeley function calling
leaderboard (bfcl): From tool use to agentic evalua-
tion of large language models. In ICML.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath,
Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-
flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. NeurIPS.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote,
Yonatan Bisk,
Adam Trischler,
and Matthew
Hausknecht. 2021.
Alfworld: Aligning text and
embodied environments for interactive learning. In
ICLR.
Yingte Shu, Yuchuan Tian, Chao Xu, Yunhe Wang, and
Hanting Chen. 2026. Deferred commitment decod-
ing for diffusion language models. arXiv preprint.
Yifan Song, Da Yin, Xiang Yue, Jie Huang, Sujian
Li, and Bill Yuchen Lin. 2024.
Trial and error:
Exploration-based trajectory optimization of LLM
agents. In ACL.
Zeyi Sun, Ziyu Liu, Yuhang Zang, Yuhang Cao, Xi-
aoyi Dong, Tong Wu, Dahua Lin, and Jiaqi Wang.
2025. Seagent: Self-evolving computer use agent
with autonomous learning from experience. arXiv
preprint.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao
Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang,
Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. 2024. A survey on large
language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers
of Computer Science.
Qingyue Wang, Yanhe Fu, Yanan Cao, Shuai Wang,
Zhiliang Tian, and Liang Ding. 2025a. Recursively
summarizing enables long-term dialogue memory in
large language models. Neurocomputing.
Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. 2022. ScienceWorld: Is
your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In EMNLP.
Xu Wang, Chenkai Xu, Yijie Jin, Jiachun Jin, Hao
Zhang, Kai Yu, and Zhijie Deng. 2025b. Diffusion
llms can do faster-than-ar inference via discrete dif-
fusion forcing. arXiv preprint.
Yu Wang, Ryuichi Takanobu, Zhiqi Liang, Yuzhen
Mao, Yuanzhe Hu, Julian McAuley, and Xiaojian
Wu. 2025c. Mem-{\alpha}: Learning memory con-
struction via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint.
Chengyue Wu, Hao Zhang, Shuchen Xue, Shizhe Diao,
Yonggan Fu, Zhijian Liu, Pavlo Molchanov, Ping
Luo, Song Han, and Enze Xie. 2025a. Fast-dllm v2:
Efficient block-diffusion llm. arXiv preprint.
Chengyue Wu, Hao Zhang, Shuchen Xue, Zhijian Liu,
Shizhe Diao, Ligeng Zhu, Ping Luo, Song Han, and
Enze Xie. 2025b. Fast-dllm: Training-free accel-
eration of diffusion llm by enabling kv cache and
parallel decoding. arXiv preprint.
Di Wu, Liang Ding, Fan Lu, and Jian Xie. 2020. Slotre-
fine: A fast non-autoregressive model for joint intent
detection and slot filling. In EMNLP.
Yiran Wu, Tianwei Yue, Shaokun Zhang, Chi Wang, and
Qingyun Wu. 2024. Stateflow: Enhancing llm task-
solving through state-driven workflows. In COLM.
Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao
Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025. A-mem: Agentic
memory for llm agents. NeurIPS.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao,
Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. 2025a. Qwen3
technical report. arXiv preprint.
Ruihan Yang, Prakhar Srivastava, and Stephan Mandt.
2023. Diffusion probabilistic modeling for video
generation. Entropy.
Yicun Yang, Cong Wang, Shaobo Wang, Zichen Wen,
Biqing Qi, Hanlin Xu, and Linfeng Zhang. 2025b.
Diffusion llm with native variable generation lengths:
Let [eos] lead the way. arXiv preprint.
Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2024. τ-bench: A benchmark for tool-
agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv
preprint.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. In ICLR.
44008

Jiacheng Ye, Zhihui Xie, Lin Zheng, Jiahui Gao, Zirui
Wu, Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong.
2025. Dream 7b: Diffusion large language models.
arXiv preprint.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. 2023.
Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot
arena. NeurIPS.
A
Description of dLLM Inference
Strategies
This section presents a concise overview of the par-
allel decoding strategies of the dLLMs evaluated
in this work.
A.1
Llada-8B: Parallel Reverse Sampling
with Confidence-Based Remasking
LLaDA (Nie et al., 2025) is trained from scratch
as a masked diffusion language model, learning a
Transformer-based mask predictor under random
masking. During SFT, prompt tokens remain un-
masked while response tokens are masked; |EOS|
is treated as a normal token during training and
used for truncation at inference.
At inference, LLaDA performs reverse diffusion
from a fully masked sequence. Given reverse steps
T and response length L, the process starts from
x(T) = (M, . . . , M) ∈{M}L.
At each step t = T, . . . , 1, all masked positions
(M) are predicted in parallel:
qi(·) = pθ(xi | p, x(t)),
x(t)
i
= M,
followed by sampling and partial remasking to ob-
tain x(t−1).
Instead of random remasking, LLaDA applies
low-confidence remasking, where tokens with the
smallest confidence (e.g., lowest maxv qi(v)) are
remasked, improving generation quality while
maintaining parallelism. The final output is x(0),
truncated at the first |EOS|.
A.2
Dream-7B: Discrete Diffusion Inference
and Parallel Denoising
Dream 7B (Ye et al., 2025) follows a discrete
diffusion-based generation paradigm, performing
inference via iterative denoising over a fixed-length
masked sequence. Starting from an initial state
filled with [MASK] (or noise-corrupted) tokens, the
model progressively refines the sequence over mul-
tiple diffusion steps, predicting all token positions
in parallel at each step.
Formally, given a total of T diffusion steps, in-
ference transforms an initial noisy sequence x(T)
into a clean output x(0). At each step,
x(t−1) ∼pθ(x | x(t), p),
t = T, . . . , 1,
where updates may be applied to all or a subset of
masked positions according to a predefined sched-
ule or confidence-based criterion. As multiple to-
kens can be updated simultaneously, Dream natu-
rally supports parallel decoding as well as infilling-
style generation.
This iterative denoising procedure exposes a flex-
ible latency–quality trade-off: fewer diffusion steps
yield faster inference at the cost of potential degra-
dation in generation quality. The Dream imple-
mentation provides configurable step counts and
sampling strategies to accommodate different de-
ployment requirements.
A.3
Fast-dLLM: Training-Free Acceleration
via KV Caching and Confidence-Aware
Parallel Decoding
Fast-dLLM (Wu et al., 2025b) is a training-free
inference acceleration framework built on top of
existing diffusion LLMs (e.g., LLaDA and Dream),
modifying only the decoding procedure. It targets
two challenges: enabling approximate KV caching
under bidirectional attention and reducing qual-
ity degradation from parallel unmasking. In our
experiments, it is applied to both Llada-8B and
Dream-7B.
Fast-dLLM adopts block-wise decoding to
make caching feasible: the generation is partitioned
into blocks, where KV states of the fixed context
(prompt and completed blocks) are cached and
reused across denoising steps, and refreshed only
at block boundaries. DualCache further improves
reuse by caching both prefix and masked suffix
blocks.
To mitigate the curse of parallel decoding, Fast-
dLLM employs confidence-aware parallel decod-
ing. For each masked position i,
ci = max
v∈V pθ(xi = v | context),
and only tokens with ci ≥τ are unmasked (or at
least the single highest-confidence token to ensure
progress). A factor-based variant selects the largest
44009

K satisfying
(K + 1)
 1 −c(K)

< γ.
Together with (Dual) KV caching, this strategy
achieves large inference speedups with minimal
accuracy loss.
A.4
FdLLM-7B: Block-Diffusion Inference
with Hierarchical Caching
Fast-dLLM v2 (Wu et al., 2025a) adapts a
pretrained autoregressive LLM (e.g., Qwen2.5-
Instruct (Yang et al., 2025a)) into a block-diffusion
decoder via light fine-tuning. The core design en-
forces causal generation across blocks while al-
lowing bidirectional refinement within each block,
preserving global left-to-right semantics while en-
abling parallel token updates locally.
At inference time, blocks are generated sequen-
tially. For block b, the prefix x<b is fixed, and
decoding starts from an all-mask block
x(0)
b
= (M, . . . , M) ∈{M}B.
Masked positions are iteratively refined using
confidence-aware parallel decoding.
For each
masked index i,
ci = max
v∈V pθ(xi = v | x<b, xb),
and tokens with ci ≥τ are unmasked (or at least
the single highest-confidence token is selected to
ensure progress).
Efficiency is achieved via hierarchical caching:
a block-level cache reuses KV states for fully
decoded past blocks, while a sub-block cache
(DualCache-style prefix–suffix reuse) reduces re-
computation during within-block refinement. This
design achieves up to ∼2.5× speedup over stan-
dard autoregressive decoding with minimal quality
degradation.
A.5
DVar-8B: EOS-Led Variable-Length
Block Diffusion
dLLM-Var (Yang et al., 2025b) enables native
variable-length decoding for diffusion LLMs, re-
moving the fixed-length constraint of vanilla
dLLMs. It is obtained by lightly fine-tuning Llada-
8B to adjust EOS behavior while preserving the
diffusion modeling.
At inference, decoding follows an EOS-led
block-diffusion process under bidirectional atten-
tion. Starting from a prompt, a block of B masked
tokens is appended and denoised in parallel; if no
|EOS| is produced, additional masked blocks are
appended iteratively until EOS appears. At block
k,
x(k) = [xprompt, ˆx1:(k−1)B, M, . . . , M
|
{z
}
B
],
and decoding terminates at the earliest EOS posi-
tion.
Efficiency comes from simple KV caching: the
prompt and completed blocks are cached as fixed
context, while computation focuses on the current
block. Parallel updates can be gated by a confi-
dence threshold,
max
v
pθ(xi = v) ≥τ (τ ≈0.9),
achieving substantial speedups without specialized
attention masks or complex cache refresh.
B
Description of Benchmarks
We provide a brief description of the benchmarks
used in our experiments to facilitate a clear under-
standing of the task requirements and to improve
reproducibility and comparability with prior work.
B.1
AgentBoard
We adopt three embodied AI task environments
from AgentBoard (Chang et al., 2024): AlfWorld,
ScienceWorld, and BabyAI. Table 11 reports the
number of tasks ("#Tasks") in each test set, along
with a representative example trajectory from each
environment, collected using Qwen-8B as the agen-
tic backbone.
B.2
BFCL-v3
We evaluate tool-calling agents on the widely
used tool-calling benchmark BFCL-v3 (Patil et al.,
2025). Table 12 summarizes the detailed configura-
tion of the test set. Since the original BFCL test set
contains over 4,000 samples, we randomly select
50 samples from each category defined in the origi-
nal dataset (see the “Categories II” column) using a
fixed random seed of 42. For categories with fewer
than 50 samples, we include all available samples
for evaluation. This procedure yields a total of 758
test samples. To accommodate space constraints,
we further regroup the original categories into a
set of consolidated labels (“Categories I”) when
reporting the main results in Table 2.
44010

Step
Thought
Action
Observation
1
I should start by checking the cabinets for finding a pan.
go to cabinet 1
On cabinet 1, you see a
bowl 1 and a plate 1.
2
I should start by checking the cabinets for finding a pan.
go to cabinet 1
Nothing happens.
3
I should start by checking the cabinets for finding a pan.
go to cabinet 1
Nothing happens.
Table 4: Retry loop example from FastdLLM-7B on AlfWorld #44. Goal: Cool a pan and put it on the countertop.
Field
Content
User Query
Can you search for the song ‘Shape of You’?
Function
play_spotify_song — searches for a song on Spotify using a query and plays it.
Model Output (Raw)
[play_spotify_song(query’,’:’: ’Shape of You’,
Correct Function Call
[play_spotify_song(query="Shape of You")]
Table 5: Schema violation example from FastdLLM-7B on BFCL live_simple_239-125-2.
C
Definitions and Theoretical
Explanations of the Non-Causal and
Fuzzy Nature of dLLMs
To support the analysis in Section 4.4, we provide
more rigorous definitions, case demonstrations,
and theoretical explanations for the non-causal and
fuzzy failure patterns of dLLMs.
C.1
Non-Causal
Definition
Non-causal refers to the contrast with
standard autoregressive (AR) causal decoding,
where tokens are generated sequentially based
on previous context (p(xt | x<t)), enabling rea-
soning and Chain-of-Thought (CoT) capabilities.
Diffusion-based LLMs (dLLMs) generate tokens
in parallel, which may weaken this causal assump-
tion and reduce the model’s ability for incremental
reasoning.
Theoretical Explanation
As shown in Table 4,
dLLMs may repeatedly preserve an outdated action
hypothesis even after receiving new environmental
feedback. In AR decoding, the causal attention
mask ensures that each position only attends to pre-
vious tokens, so new observations (e.g., “On cabi-
net 1, see a bowl and a plate”) directly and exclu-
sively update all subsequent actions, allowing the
agent to correct its plan when previous attempts fail.
In diffusion decoding, however, full bidirectional
attention is applied across the entire sequence, di-
luting the influence of any single observation and
weakening the model’s sensitivity to local feedback.
As a result, the model may repeat the same action
(“go to cabinet 1”) despite receiving negative envi-
ronmental feedback, leading to failure modes such
as retry loops in embodied agent tasks.
C.2
Fuzzy
Definition
Fuzzy refers to the tendency of
dLLMs to produce structurally malformed outputs
due to their continuous-to-discrete generation pro-
cess. Unlike AR decoding, which enforces local
syntactic constraints token by token, dLLMs iter-
atively refine continuous latent representations of
the entire sequence before projecting to discrete to-
kens, making them prone to schema violations such
as malformed function calls or broken key-value
syntax.
Theoretical Explanation
As shown in Table 5,
unlike AR decoding, where the causal attention
mask ensures each structural token (e.g., =, ") is
uniquely constrained by its prefix, diffusion de-
coding applies bidirectional attention across the
entire sequence, lacking position-specific syntac-
tic constraints. This leads to structurally inconsis-
tent outputs — the model produces garbled syntax
(query’,’:’: ’Shape of You’) instead of the
valid schema (query="Shape of You"), render-
ing the function call unparseable despite correctly
identifying the target function and argument.
D
Discussion of Other dLLMs and
Optimization Techniques
This appendix discusses three additional questions
raised during the rebuttal stage that are closely re-
lated to the scope and interpretation of our main
results.
D.1
Can dLLM Optimization Techniques
Solve Failures in Agentic Workflows?
Motivation
Our main experiments focus on a re-
stricted set of dLLM optimization strategies (e.g.,
44011

dLLM
Inference
AlfWorld
ScienceWorld
BabyAI
BFCL
Success
Progress
Success
Progress
Success
Progress
Single-Live
Dream-7B
Vanilla
0.7
6.0
0.6
5.3
8.9
14.8
1.5
APD
0.0
10.9
0.0
3.3
4.5
9.4
31.4
D2F
2.9
13.8
2.2
6.7
9.8
23.6
34.3
FdLLM-7B
Vanilla
3.3
7.8
0.7
6.4
5.4
12.6
0.0
DCD
10.4
30.8
0.0
6.4
8.0
13.3
30.7
Table 6: Comparison of recent dLLM optimization techniques on embodied and tool-calling tasks. We report
Success Rate (%) and Progress Rate (%) on ALFWorld, ScienceWorld, and BabyAI, and Accuracy (%) on BFCL
Single-Live.
FastdLLM and DLLMVar). To broaden this cover-
age, we further incorporate several recent decoding
advances as supplementary experiments and exam-
ine whether they materially change the conclusions
of our main study.
Settings
For clarity, we list the relevant methods
below together with the implementation settings
adopted in our evaluation:
• APD (Israel et al., 2025):
We implement
Dream-7B + APD using the balanced config-
uration to preserve both performance and effi-
ciency (R = 0.7, W = 16, M = 100), with
Qwen2.5-0.5B as the approximate AR model.
• DCD (Shu et al., 2026): We adopt DCD with
FdLLM-7B (dual cache), corresponding to the
best-performing configuration reported in the
original paper.
• D2F (Wang et al., 2025b): We apply D2F on
top of Dream-7B, as this combination achieves
the strongest performance in the original study.
Results
From Table 6, we observe that on em-
bodied tasks, APD and D2F yield only limited
gains for Dream-7B. On ALFWorld, they modestly
improve progress rate while leaving success rate
low, whereas on ScienceWorld and BabyAI, D2F
is consistently stronger than APD. For FdLLM-
7B, DCD substantially improves ALFWorld and
BFCL performance, but its gains on ScienceWorld
and BabyAI remain limited. On tool-calling tasks,
APD, D2F, and DCD all raise the original baseline
to above 30% accuracy, placing them in a similar
performance tier to the stronger dLLM variants
in our main results. Overall, although these tech-
niques lead to notable improvements, a substantial
gap between dLLMs and AR LLMs remains, and
our overall conclusion still holds.
D.2
Can Agent-Level Optimization Improve
dLLM Agent Performance?
Motivation
Our main experiments do not con-
sider two related directions. First, we do not cover
agentic workflows beyond standard ReAct-style ex-
ecution, such as Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023)
and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023). Second, we
do not study the use of AR models as feedback
signals to assist a dLLM agent, but only include
AR models as sub-modules within the DiffuAgent
framework. A reasonable concern is that if AR
feedback can help a dLLM agent converge to a rea-
sonable multi-step action chain, then the weakness
of dLLMs may reflect unstable planning rather than
a systematic defect. We emphasize that incorporat-
ing techniques such as multi-trial refinement (e.g.,
self-refine) or in-trajectory autoregressive feedback
is beyond the main scope of this paper, since it
shifts the focus from evaluating native dLLM be-
havior to optimizing agent-level performance and
also reduces the runtime efficiency that motivates
the use of dLLMs. Nevertheless, examining such
settings provides a more complete validation.
Settings
To examine this concern, we conduct
additional experiments on the ALFWorld test set.
We use DVar-8B as the primary agent backbone
and Qwen-8B (Yang et al., 2025a) as the AR re-
finement or feedback module. We consider three
augmentation settings:
1. AR self-refine with up to 2 trials, where the
AR model performs reflection and replanning
based on the trajectory generated by the dLLM;
2. AR feedback every 5 steps within a single tra-
jectory;
3. AR feedback at every step, forming a tightly
coupled hybrid loop.
44012

Agent Optimization Method
SR (%)
PR (%)
DVar-8B (Baseline)
0.7
10.0
+ AR Self-Refine (2 trials)
1.5
13.5
+ AR Feedback (every 5 steps)
2.2
15.2
+ AR Feedback (every step)
2.2
15.4
Table 7: Comparison of agent-level optimization
methods on ALFWorld. We report Success Rate (%)
and Progress Rate (%) with DVar-8B as the primary
dLLM backbone and Qwen-8B as the AR refinement or
feedback module.
Results
Table 7 shows that these agent-level op-
timization strategies do improve embodied perfor-
mance, but the gains remain limited. AR self-refine
raises the success rate from 0.7% to 1.5%, while
periodic or step-wise AR feedback increases it to
2.2%. The progress rate also rises from 10.0% to
15.2–15.4%. These results suggest that external
autoregressive refinement can partially mitigate the
identified failure modes, but it still does not close
the gap.
D.3
Can the Bitter Lesson Generalize to
Other Agentic Benchmarks?
Motivation
Our main experiments focus on
BFCL as the primary tool-calling benchmark and
therefore do not directly cover conversational multi-
turn tool-use settings such as Tau-Bench (Yao et al.,
2024). In our preliminary attempts on Tau-Bench
and SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al., 2023), we found
that most samples exceed the context window of
the tested dLLMs, making direct evaluation invalid.
Therefore, we only report Tau-Bench mock, the
lightest Tau-Bench domain, as a basic sanity-check
benchmark for lightweight interactive tool use, and
leave broader evaluation on larger Tau-Bench do-
mains and SWE-Bench to future work.
Settings
We evaluate on the Tau-Bench mock
with max_steps=20 and max_errors=5.
Since
the original split contains one broken task (up-
date_task_with_user_tools), we exclude it and re-
port results on the remaining 9 tasks. We compare
Qwen-8B, FdLLM-7B with DCD, Dream-7B with
D2F, and DVar-8B.
Results
Table 8 shows that Qwen-8B is the only
model that achieves a non-zero score on Tau-Bench
mock, indicating that the benchmark pipeline and
text-based tool-calling fallback are workable. In
contrast, FdLLM-7B with DCD and DVar-8B both
finish valid runs but remain at zero pass rate,
Model
Status Eval. Reward Pass Infra
Qwen-8B
valid
8
0.25
0.25
1
FdLLM-7B + DCD
valid
9
0.00
0.00
0
Dream-7B + D2F
invalid
0
-
-
9
DVar-8B
valid
9
0.00
0.00
0
Table 8: Results on Tau-Bench mock. We report the
number of evaluated tasks, average reward, pass rate,
and infrastructure errors after excluding one broken task
from the original 10-task split, leaving 9 effective tasks.
typically producing repetitive natural-language re-
sponses instead of entering the required tool-calling
protocol. Dream-7B with D2F fails earlier in the
stack, with all 9 tasks ending as infrastructure er-
rors because the benchmark receives assistant turns
with neither usable content nor tool calls. Overall,
these results suggest that the main bottleneck is not
only serving stability, but also policy following and
action formatting under the Tau-Bench interaction
loop, which further strengthens our bitter lesson.
D.4
Can Schema-Checking Methods Improve
dLLM Tool Calling?
Motivation
Our main experiments do not sepa-
rately evaluate whether simple schema-checking
heuristics or lightweight structural guardrails could
materially close the tool-calling gap.
A natu-
ral concern is that if such post-hoc repairs were
already sufficient to recover most failures, then
the observed weakness of dLLMs might mainly
come from superficial formatting errors rather than
deeper decoding problems.
Settings
To assess whether lightweight structural
guardrails could close the tool-calling performance
gap, we conduct an additional controlled study on
100 uniformly sampled BFCL outputs across four
dLLMs. We consider three simple guardrails:
• G1: Repetition truncation, which removes
repetitive trailing content;
• G2: First-bracket extraction, which extracts
the first complete bracketed structure from the
raw output;
• G3: Dict-unpacking repair, which repairs mal-
formed Python-style dict-unpacking patterns.
We also evaluate their combined version.
Results
Table 9 shows that even when combin-
ing all three guardrails (G1+G2+G3), only 21%
44013

Guardrail
Parse (%)
Semantic (%)
Fail (%)
G1: Truncate
9
8
92
G2: Extract
20
12
88
G3: Repair
1
1
99
G1+G2+G3
21
14
86
Table 9: Results of lightweight schema guardrails on
BFCL outputs. Each number denotes the percentage of
sampled cases in the corresponding category over 100
BFCL outputs. Parse denotes syntactic recovery, Seman-
tic denotes semantic correctness, and Fail denotes the
remaining failures. G1 denotes truncation, G2 denotes
first-bracket extraction, and G3 denotes dict-unpacking
repair.
of BFCL outputs achieve syntactic recovery and
only 14% reach semantic correctness, while 86%
still fail. Among these remaining failures, 79%
still break at the parsing stage due to deeply cor-
rupted or incomplete AST structures that cannot
be repaired by local structural heuristics, while the
remaining 7% are syntactically valid but seman-
tically incorrect, such as wrong function names,
incorrect argument values, or mismatched argu-
ment counts. We further note that BFCL already
evaluates schema adherence through its built-in
ast_decoder verification. This means the bench-
mark itself already provides a strong structural va-
lidity check, and our additional analysis shows that
the dominant failure modes arise from deeper de-
coding and semantic errors rather than superficial
format violations.
E
Detailed Results on the BFCL-v3
Benchmark under the DiffuAgent
Framework
To facilitate clearer comparisons and ensure re-
producibility, we report detailed statistical results
on the BFCL-v3 benchmark in Table 10, reported
separately for the “Standard” and “Challenge” cat-
egories. The results are consistent with Figure 7.
F
Prompt Context
F.1
Embodied Agentic Workflow
ReAct Prompt
Following Chang et al. (2024),
we use the provided task instruction, task goal, and
in-context example for each dataset. As Chang
et al. (2024) adopt an act-only prompting style
rather than ReAct prompting, we follow Song et al.
(2024) to design a ReAct-style prompt format. For
ALFWorld and ScienceWorld, we include valid
action lists for these two datasets to ensure fair
comparison with prior work (Song et al., 2024; Fu
et al., 2025a). See the corresponding PROMPT with
AlfWorld as an example.
DiffuAgent: Memory
For memory-augmented
agents, we use gpt-5.1-2025-11-13 to construct 3
memory EXEMPLARS by transforming original Re-
Act trajectories, and using a direct PROMPT for sum-
marizing the previous memory.
DiffuAgent: EarlyExit
We follow (Lu et al.,
2025) to use the same early-exit PROMPT for ex-
ternal verification.
F.2
Tool-Calling Agentic Workflow
Tool-Calling Prompt
For the experiments in this
work, we follow BFCL (Patil et al., 2025) and adopt
their PROMPT without any modification to ensure
faithful reproduction. Although Qwen-8B provides
a dedicated tool-calling mode, we do not use it in
this work, as our initial experiments indicate that
many tools provided in BFCL do not strictly adhere
to the requirements of the tool-calling mode.
DiffuAgent: Tool Selector
We employ a tool se-
lector prior to tool-call generation; the correspond-
ing prompt is provided in PROMPT. The selector
takes the available functions and the interaction
history as input, and outputs a subset of tools to be
selected. We then update the tool descriptions to
include only this selected subset.
DiffuAgent: Too-Call Editor
We introduce a
tool editor to refine generated tool calls; the cor-
responding prompt is provided in PROMPT. It is
prompted with examples of various broken tool-
call cases and outputs either a corrected tool call,
“UNCHANGED” if the original call is valid, or
“NO_VALID_TOOL_CALLS” when the output
contains only textual explanations.
44014

Qwen-8B Agent
Ministral-8B Agent
Modules
BFCL Multi-Turn (%)
Modules
BFCL Multi-Turn (%)
Selector
Editor
Standard Challenge
Avg.
Selector
Editor
Standard Challenge
Avg.
Agent + Selector
Qwen-8B
-
26.0
16.0
18.5
Ministral-8B
-
18.0
12.0
13.5
Llada-8B
-
16.0
11.3
12.5
Llada-8B
-
16.0
10.7
12.0
Dream-7B
-
14.0
12.7
13.0
Dream-7B
-
12.0
10.0
10.5
FdLLM-7B
-
16.0
8.0
10.0
FdLLM-7B
-
12.0
6.0
7.5
DVar-8B
-
20.0
8.7
11.5
DVar-8B
-
2.0
4.7
4.0
Agent + Editor
-
Qwen-8B
26.0
12.0
15.5
-
Ministral-8B
14.0
17.3
16.5
-
Llada-8B
20.0
14.7
16.0
-
Llada-8B
12.0
12.7
12.5
-
Dream-7B
16.0
12.0
13.0
-
Dream-7B
12.0
11.3
11.5
-
FdLLM-7B
2.0
2.0
2.0
-
FdLLM-7B
0.0
0.7
0.5
-
DVar-8B
0.0
0.0
0.0
-
DVar-8B
0.0
0.0
0.0
Agent + Selector + Editor
Qwen-8B
Qwen-8B
28.0
15.3
18.5
Ministral-8B Ministral-8B
20.0
12.7
14.5
Llada-8B
Llada-8B
16.0
10.0
11.5
Llada-8B
Llada-8B
16.0
10.0
11.5
Dream-7B
Dream-7B
22.0
9.3
12.5
Dream-7B
Dream-7B
12.0
11.3
11.5
FdLLM-7B FdLLM-7B
2.0
0.7
1.0
FdLLM-7B
FdLLM-7B
2.0
0.7
1.0
DVar-8B
DVar-8B
0.0
0.0
0.0
DVar-8B
DVar-8B
0.0
0.0
0.0
Table 10: Ablation performance of tool-calling agents on BFCL-v3 Multi-Turn benchmark, evaluated with
different backbone models for the agent modules (Selector and Editor).
44015

Test Set
#Tasks
Example Task & Trajectory
AlfWorld
134
Task: Look at the bowl under the desklamp.
T:
I should check the desks to see if there’s a desklamp and a bowl nearby. I’ll start with desk 1.
A:
go to desk 1
O:
On the desk 1, you see a desklamp, a keychain, a mug, pens, and a pencil.
T:
I found a desklamp on desk 1. I should check if there’s a bowl nearby.
A:
examine desk 1
O:
No bowl found on desk 1.
T:
I didn’t find a bowl on desk 1. I’ll check desk 2 next.
A:
go to desk 2
O:
On the desk 2, you see an alarm clock, a bowl, and CDs.
T:
I found a bowl on desk 2 and can use the desklamp from desk 1.
A:
take bowl from desk 2
O:
You pick up the bowl from desk 2.
T:
I need to return to desk 1 where the desklamp is.
A:
go to desk 1
O:
The desklamp is available on desk 1.
T:
I should use the desklamp to look at the bowl.
A:
use desklamp
O:
You turn on the desklamp.
ScienceWorld
90
Task: Find the animal with the longest life span.
T:
I need to focus on the animal with the longest lifespan. Since the bee hive is open and contains multiple adult bees, I should focus on the
bees first.
A:
focus on adult bee
O:
Ambiguous request: multiple adult bees are present in the bee hive.
T:
I need to determine which animal has the longest lifespan. I will focus on one bee to gather information.
A:
focus on adult bee (in bee hive, in greenhouse)
O:
Unknown action.
T:
I need to examine the bee to determine its lifespan. I will try to look at the bee for more information.
A:
look at adult bee (in bee hive, in greenhouse)
O:
No known action matches that input.
T:
I need to inspect the bee hive more closely to determine information about the bees.
A:
look in bee hive
O:
Inside the bee hive are several adult bees.
T:
The bee hive does not provide lifespan information. I should explore other locations for animals with longer lifespans.
A:
go to outside
O:
You move to the outside.
T:
I need to explore the outside location to find animals with long lifespans.
A:
look around
O:
You see various animals, including a baby dragonfly, a baby wolf, and a giant tortoise egg.
T:
Tortoises are known for long lifespans, so I should examine the giant tortoise egg first.
A:
focus on giant tortoise egg
O:
You focus on the giant tortoise egg.
BabyAI
112
Task: go to the red ball.
T:
I need to find the red ball, so I’ll start by exploring forward.
A:
move forward
O:
There is a barrier in front of you, you can’t move forward.
T:
There’s a wall ahead. I’ll turn to look for a clearer path toward the red ball.
A:
turn right
O:
In front of you in this room, you can see several objects: The room has walls around you. You are facing a wall 2 steps away. You are not
carrying anything.
T:
There’s more space in this direction. I’ll move forward to see if I can spot the red ball.
A:
move forward
O:
In front of you in this room, you can see several objects: The room has walls around you. You are facing a wall 1 steps away. You are not
carrying anything.
T:
This wall is close. I’ll try turning again to scan for the red ball.
A:
turn left
O:
In front of you in this room, you can see several objects: The room has walls around you. You are facing a wall 1 steps away. You are not
carrying anything.
T:
I need to find a different direction to explore since turning left and right is not allowed. I’ll try moving forward again to see if there’s a new
path.
A:
move forward
O:
There is a barrier in front of you, you can’t move forward.
T:
I need to find a different direction to explore since moving forward is blocked. I’ll try turning left to see if there’s a new path.
A:
turn left
O:
In front of you in this room, you can see several objects: There is a grey box 1 3 steps in front of you and 1 steps to your left. There is a grey
ball 1 2 steps in front of you and 2 steps to your left. There is a red ball 1 right in front of you 5 steps away. There is a grey key 1 4 steps in
front of you and 1 steps to your left. The room has walls around you. You are facing a wall 6 steps away. You are not carrying anything.
T:
I can see the red ball now! Let’s head toward it.
A:
go to red ball 1
O:
In front of you in this room, you can see several objects: There is a red ball 1 right in front of you 1 steps away. There is a grey key 1 0
steps in front of you and 1 steps to your left. The room has walls around you. You are facing a wall 2 steps away. You are not carrying
anything. The task is completed.
Table 11: Overview of embodied agent tasks in the AgentBoard (Chang et al., 2024) benchmark. In the
example trajectories, "T", "A", and "O" denote Thought, Action, and Observation, respectively.
44016

Categories I
(This Work)
Categories II
(Original Testset)
#Used
(#Original)
Example & Tool-Call
Non-Live (300)
Non-Live
simple
50 (400)
U:
Convert 150 Euros to Canadian dollars.
T:
currency_conversion.convert
TC: [currency_conversion.convert(amount=150, from_currency=’EUR’, to_currency=’CAD’)]
java
50 (100)
U:
Can I determine if the symbol ’getVersion’ is readable in the native function interface library
associated with the current object?
T:
NFILibrary.isMemberReadable
TC: [NFILibrary.isMemberReadable(symbol=’getVersion’)]
javascript
50 (50)
U:
Help me reset a state property called ’userSession’ to ’null’ in a React component?
T:
resetStateProperty
TC: [resetStateProperty(stateProperty=üserSession¨)]
multiple
50 (200)
U:
What’s the area of a circle with a radius of 10?
T:
geometry.area_circle, plot_sine_wave
TC: [geometry.area_circle(radius=10)]
parallel
50 (200)
U:
How to save game progress at stage 7 in easy mode and stage 3 in hard mode?
T:
game.save_progress
TC: [game.save_progress(stage=7, mode=’easy’), game.save_progress(stage=3, mode=’hard’)]
parallel_multiple
50 (200)
U:
Invest $2000 in Google and withdraw $1000 from Apple.
T:
investment.withdraw, investment.invest
TC: [investment.invest(company="Google", amount=2000),
investment.withdraw(company="Apple", amount=1000)]
Single-Turn Live (140)
S.
live_simple
50 (258)
U:
Order me pizza.
T:
ChaFod
TC: [ChaFod(TheFod="PIZZA")]
M.
live_multiple
50 (1053)
U:
Can you find me a Family Counselor in Gilroy?
T:
Services_4_BookAppointment, Services_4_FindProvider, Weather_1_GetWeather
TC: [Services_4_FindProvider(city="Gilroy, CA", type="Family Counselor")]
P.
live_parallel
16 (16)
U:
What’s the snow like in the two cities of Paris and Bordeaux?
T:
get_snow_report
TC: [get_snow_report(location="Paris, France"), get_snow_report(location="Bordeaux, France")]
PM.
live_parallel_multiple
24 (24)
U:
interviewers list for Python and Java
T:
get_interviewer_list, review_of_interviewer
TC: [get_interviewer_list(skill="Python"), get_interviewer_list(skill="Java")]
Multi-Turn (200)
Standard
multi_turn_base
50 (200)
U:
Hey, I’ve just filled my car up with 13.2 gallons of fuel. How much is that in liters?
TC: [gallon_to_liter(gallon=13.2)]
U:
Once you’ve converted it to liters, please guide me in filling the tank to the max limit. After that’s
sorted, I need to ensure that all the doors are securely locked and the parking brake is firmly set.
TC: [fillFuelTank(fuelAmount=36.8), lockDoors(unlock=False, door=["driver", "passenger",
"rear_left", "rear_right"]), activateParkingBrake(mode="engage")]
...
Challenge
multi_turn_miss_func
50 (200)
U:
I’ve been thinking of visiting Autumnville for a while now, but I’m not sure how far it is from
here in Crescent Hollow. Can you help me figure this out so I can plan my trip accordingly?
TC: [get_zipcode_based_on_city(city="Crescent Hollow"),
get_zipcode_based_on_city(city="Autumnville"),
estimate_drive_feasibility_by_mileage(distance=100)], [estimate_distance(cityA="69238",
cityB="51479")]
U:
Oh, and by the way, there’s something else I need help with. I want to calculate the logarithm of
the distance you’ve just told me about, considering a base 10 with a precision of 5 digits. Could
you provide me with this value as well?
TC: [logarithm(value=630.0, base=10, precision=5)]]
multi_turn_miss_param
50 (200)
U:
Hey there, I noticed that all of my car doors seem to have locked themselves up, and with my
schedule being pretty tight today, I’m in quite a pinch. I could really use your help to get some of
them unlocked.
TC: [lockDoors(unlock=True, door=["driver", "passenger", "rear_left", "rear_right"])],
[lockDoors(unlock=False, door=["driver", "passenger", "rear_left", "rear_right"])]
U:
I mean could you help me get all those doors unlocked? It’d be fantastic if you could also switch
on the headlights. It’s getting a bit darker out here than expected, and visibility’s not great!
TC: [lockDoors(unlock=True, door=["driver", "passenger", "rear_left", "rear_right"]),
setHeadlights(mode="on")]
multi_turn_long_context
50 (200)
U:
It’d be great if you could pop Zeta Corp’s stock onto my watchlist. I’ve come across some
fascinating insights into their recent performance that I want to monitor.
TC: [add_to_watchlist(stock="ZETA")]
U:
With Zeta Corp’s stock now on my radar, let’s pull up the complete list of stocks I’m watching. I
want to double-check that all my chosen stocks are properly listed for my review.
TC: [get_watchlist()]
Hallucination (118)
Rel.
live_relevance
18 (18)
U:
Hi, could you get me a house to stay for 4 in London?
T:
Hotels_2_BookHouse, Hotels_2_SearchHouse
TC: [Hotels_2_SearchHouse(where_to="London, UK", number_of_adults=4)]
Irrel.
irrelevance
50 (240)
U:
What defines scientist?
T:
get_historical_figure_info
live_irrelevance
50 (882)
U:
dsfsdf
T:
calculate_tax
Table 12: Overview of tool-calling tasks in the BFCL benchmark (Patil et al., 2025). "U", "T", and "TC" denote
the User message, available Tools, and the generated Tool Call, respectively.
44017

Embodied Agent: ReAct-Style
SYSTEM:
You are a helpful assistant.
USER:
Your task is to interact with a virtual
household simulator to accomplish a
specific task. With each interaction, you
will receive an observation. Your role is to
... {task instruction}
Here is the example: {example}
Now, it’s your turn.
You should per-
form thoughts and actions to accomplish
the goal.
Your response should use the
following format:
Thought: <your thoughts>
Action: <your next action>
Your task is: {task goal}
You are in the middle of a room. Looking
quickly around you, ... {init observation}
{interaction history}
The next action could be chosen from these
valid actions: {valid actions}
DiffuAgent: 3 Memory Exemplars
Example 1:
Memory: (empty)
Thought:
I should check nearby stor-
age spaces for a spraybottle.
Action: go to cabinet 1
Observation: On the cabinet 1, you see a
cloth 1, a soapbar 1, a soapbottle 1.
Example 2:
Memory: The agent has checked cabinet 1
and found no spraybottle, then moved to
cabinet 2 and discovered it was closed.
Cabinet 2 is still unopened and uninspected
inside.
Thought:
I need to open this cabinet
to see what’s inside.
Action: open cabinet 2
Observation: You open the cabinet 2. The
cabinet 2 is open. In it, you see a candle 1,
and a spraybottle 2.
Example 3:
Memory: The agent has searched cabinet 1
(without finding a spraybottle), opened
cabinet 2 (where the spraybottle was found),
picked up spraybottle 2, and moved to
the toilet 1 (where a soapbottle was present).
Thought:
It’s time to place the spray-
bottle on the toilet to complete the task.
Action: put spraybottle 2 in/on toilet 1
Observation: You put the spraybottle 2
in/on the toilet 1.
DiffuAgent: Pre-hoc Memory Update
SYSTEM:
You are a memory updater. Update the mem-
ory_str to reflect what the agent has done
and learned so far. Include important ac-
tions taken, locations visited, and key obser-
vations. Keep the summary concise, chrono-
logical, and consistent. Do not invent new
facts or omit relevant past actions. Write the
memory in third-person, concise past tense,
like a mission log.
USER:
Memory_str: {previous memory_str}
Recent_steps: {recent interaction steps}
Please output the updated Memory_str only
— a short narrative summary of what has
been done and observed so far. No explana-
tions or formatting other than plain text.
Memory_str:
DiffuAgent: Post-hoc Exit Verification
SYSTEM:
You are a helpful assistant.
USER:
You will be given a historical scenario in
which you are placed in a specific environ-
ment with a designated objective to accom-
plish.
### Task Description: Your task is to in-
teract with a virtual household simulator to
accomplish a specific task. With each in-
teraction, you will receive an observation.
44018

Your role is to ... {task instruction}
### Your Objective:
{task goal}
Your Current History:
{interaction history}
Instructions:
{extrinsic early-exit instruction}
Do not include any additional text or expla-
nations in your response.
Tool-Call Agent: BFCL default Prompts
SYSTEM:
You are an expert in composing functions.
You are given a question and a set of possi-
ble functions. Based on the question, you
will need to make one or more function/tool
calls to achieve the purpose.
If none of the functions can be used, point
it out.
If the given question lacks the
parameters required by the function, also
point it out. You should only return the
function calls in your response.
If you decide to invoke any of the func-
tion(s), you MUST put it in the format of
[func_name1(params_name1=params_value1,
params_name2=params_value2...),
func_name2(params)]
You SHOULD NOT include any other text
in the response.
At
each
turn,
you
should
try
your
best to complete the tasks requested by
the user within the current turn. Continue
to output functions to call until you have
fulfilled the user’s request to the best of
your ability.
Once you have no more
functions to call, the system will consider
the current turn complete and proceed to
the next turn or task.
Here is a list of functions in JSON
format that you can invoke.
{function
descriptions}
USER:
{user message}
DiffuAgent: Pre-hoc Tool Selection
SYSTEM:
You are a tool selector for a function-calling
agent.
Task:
Given a user message ([User Message]), the
previous tool call ([Tool Call]) and its re-
sults ([Tool Execution Results]), you must
select a minimum of 3 distinct functions
from the provided list.
Rules:
• Output at least 3 function names, and
no more than 10 functions.
• Use ONLY names from the provided
function list.
• Output ONLY function names. No ex-
planations or extra text.
• Prioritize the [USER MESSAGE]
above all else; use previous tool calls
and results only as supplementary con-
text.
USER:
Functions:
{available functions}
{interaction history: user message, tool
calls, tool execution results}
Selected Functions:
DiffuAgent: Tool-Call Editor
SYSTEM:
You are a strict tool-call format auditor and
repairer.
Your task: Repair or validate a broken tool-
call and output a final call that strictly fol-
lows TOOL_CALL_FORMAT.
Rules:
• If the tool-call is already valid and cor-
rect, output UNCHANGED.
• If the tool-call is textual explanations,
output NO_VALID_TOOL_CALLS.
• If the tool-call contains both explana-
tions and tool-calls, remove the expla-
44019

nations and correct the tool-calls.
• If the tool-call does not conform to
TOOL_CALL_FORMAT, repair any
format or schema errors and output the
corrected tool-call only; do not invent
functions or parameters.
TOOL_CALL_FORMAT:
[func_name1(param_name1=param_value1,
param_name2=param_value2, ...),
func_name2(param_name3=param_value3,
...)]
Examples:
BROKEN_TOOL_CALL 1:
[cd(folder="academic_venture")]
Output: UNCHANGED
BROKEN_TOOL_CALL 2:
cd(folder="academic_venture")
Output: [cd(folder="academic_venture")]
BROKEN_TOOL_CALL 3:
"cd": "folder": "academic_venture"
Output: [cd(folder="academic_venture")]
BROKEN_TOOL_CALL 4:
The task is now complete.
Output: NO_VALID_TOOL_CALLS
BROKEN_TOOL_CALL 5:
The task is now complete. The final tool-
call is "ls":
Output: [ls()]
USER:
BROKEN_TOOL_CALL (to be audited
and possibly corrected):
{model response}
Now produce the final output according to
the rules above. No explanations, mark-
down, or extra text.
Output:
44020
